His Excellency, the President of Indonesia, Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, His Excellency, the Secretary-General of the United Nations, Ban Ki-moon, fellow national Leaders, Ministers, Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen, and all people of goodwill committed to the future of our planet.
I join with the Secretary-General and with the President of the Indonesian Republic in expressing our combined condemnation of this obscene terrorist attack in Algiers. An attack on innocent civilians, an attack on the agents of peace, those working for the United Nations, and therefore, an attack on us all.  And I join with them in extending our thoughts and our prayers to those directly affected by this obscene attack.
A little over a week ago I had the honour of being elected as Australia's 26th Prime Minister.
In my first act as Prime Minister, I signed the formal instrument for Australia to ratify the Kyoto Protocol.
And just a few moments ago I handed, personally, that instrument of ratification to the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
I did so, and my Government has done so, because we believe that climate change represents one of the greatest moral, economic and environmental challenges of our age.
Australia now stands ready to assume its responsibility in responding to this challenge  -  both at home and in the complex negotiations which lie ahead across the community of nations.
For Australians, climate change is no longer a distant threat. It is no longer a scientific theory.  It is an emerging reality.
In fact, what we see today is a portent of things to come:
     * In Australia, our inland rivers are dying. 
     * Bushfires are becoming more ferocious, and more frequent.
     * Our unique natural wonders  -  the Great Barrier Reef, Kakadu, our rainforests  -  are now at risk.
 This will sound familiar to many of our Pacific neighbours who are experiencing the impacts of rising sea levels, more frequent severe weather events and diminishing access to freshwater.
And regrettably it is now an increasingly familiar story across the globe, as reflected in the critical conclusions of the Fourth IPCC Report released last month.
Climate change is the defining challenge of our generation.
Our choice will impact all future generations.
This is, therefore, a problem which requires a global solution.
It requires a multilateral solution.
Unilateral action is not enough.
We must all share the burden.
Australia has a long tradition of multilateral engagement:
     * Australia was a founding state of the United Nations at San Francisco in 1945.
     * The Cambodian Peace Settlement.
     * The Chemical Weapons Convention.
     * The Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty.
     * Australia was, in fact, among the first to sign the Framework Convention on Climate Change in 1992. 
 In the past we have been willing to put our shoulder to the wheel.
And what I say to this conference today is that under the Government I lead, we are doing so again.
For too long sceptics have warned of the costs of taking action on climate change. 
But the costs of action are far less than the costs of inaction.  
We must lift our national and international gaze beyond the immediate horizon - to comprehend the magnitude of the economic and environmental challenge that is unfolding before us.
Action to tackle climate change will not be easy. It will require tough choices.
And some of these will come at a political price.
But unless we act, the long-term costs will threaten the security and the stability of us all.
The truth is that we  -  the community of nations  -  are in this together.
The truth is that this challenge of climate change transcends the old ideological, political and developmental divide.
As our host, President Yudhoyono, said to me when we met yesterday, there can be no North or South, given the dimensions of this challenge.
Together we are custodians of the planet.
Together we are custodians of the planet's future.
That's why these deliberations here are so important.
That is why climate change is a top priority of the new Australian Government.
We have embraced a comprehensive plan of action.
The Government has committed to reducing Australia's greenhouse gas emissions by 60 per cent on 2000 levels by 2050.
Last year  -  when my party was not in government  -  we commissioned a major study to help us to set shorter term targets along the way.
This study, the Garnaut Review, will report in mid 2008.
Together with modelling underway in the Australian Treasury, and also critically, informed by the science, this Review will drive our decisions on short and medium term targets.
These will be real targets. These will be robust targets.
And they will be targets fully cognisant of the science.
And they will set Australia firmly on the path to achieving our commitment of a 60 per cent reduction in emissions by 2050.
But it is not enough just to have targets.
We have to be prepared to back them with sustained action  -  because targets must be, must be translated into reality.
Australia will implement a comprehensive emissions trading scheme by 2010 to deliver these targets.
We will increase the proportion of renewable energy to 20 per cent of our national electricity supply by 2020.
We will invest in research and development to deliver transforming technologies.
But whatever one country does alone, it will not be enough.
This conference must agree to work together on a shared global emissions goal.
A goal that, on the best advice available, recognises the core reality that we must avoid dangerous climate change.
We must now move forward as a truly ‘United Nations' with developed and developing countries working in parallel.
We expect all developed countries to embrace a further set of binding emissions targets  -  and we need this meeting at Bali to map out the process and timeline in which this will happen.
And we need developing countries to play their part  -  with specific commitments to action.
And we need all developed nations, all developed nations  -  those within the framework of the Kyoto Protocol, and those outside the framework  -  to embrace comparable efforts in order to bring about the global outcomes the people of the world now expect of us.
The approach we take must be comprehensive and must incorporate critical challenges, including deforestation.
Australia believes that action on climate change and action on development must proceed in tandem.
We understand that development is a top priority.
We strongly support the Millennium Development Goals, reinforced by our policy as a new Government of Australia, to increase our level of ODA from current levels to 0.5 of GNI by 2015.
We must all respect the aspiration of developing nations to secure their economic development and deliver rising living standards for their people.
But failure to act on climate change will make the development goal even harder to achieve.
Australia recognises the particular responsibility of the developed countries to assist developing nations in this process of transition. 
In the form of technology transfer.
In the form of financial incentives.
And in the form of support for adaptation.
Around the world, great steps forward are being taken by individuals, by households, businesses, communities, organisations, scientists and governments.
But the effectiveness of all those efforts rests on the negotiations that begin here.
As we work towards achieving a new global compact in 2009, Australia is committed to working hard to build bridges between nations with differing circumstances and differing outlooks.
The world expects us to deliver binding targets.
The world expects us to deliver specific commitments.
It expects us all to pull together and for us all to do our fair share.
The Government I lead is only 10 days old.
It is a Government that is realistic about the difficult challenges ahead, particularly in the two years leading up to the Copenhagen conference.
It is a Government now prepared to take on the challenge, to do the hard work now and to deliver a sustainable future.
The community of nations must reach agreement.
There is no Plan B.
There is no other planet that we can escape to.
We only have this one.
And none of us can do it alone.
So let's get it right.
The generations of the future will judge us harshly if we fail.
But I am optimistic that with clarity of purpose, clear-sightedness, courage and commitment we can prevail in this great task of working together to save our common planet.
I thank you.


The platform I put forward to the Australian people was for a Government that anticipates the challenges of the future  -  and a government that has a plan to tackle these challenges head on.
The future of the national economy is core business for the new Government of Australia.
A Government committed to responsible economic management.
A Government equally committed to investing in Australia's long term economic future.
And a Government prepared to take hard decisions on the way.
And the purpose: to improve the lives and livelihoods of Australian working families.
I am an unapologetic optimist about our long term future
But the truth is the challenges we face are formidable.
There is absolutely nothing guaranteed about our economic future.
We can't rely on luck.
In this country we must make our own luck.
And to do that we must plan hard for it and work hard for it.
Over the last six months, the global economy has entered into uncertain times.
On the domestic front, we face the underlying challenge of how long we can expect Australia to enjoy the best terms of trade this country has had since the early 1950s.
Nonetheless, despite more than five years of unprecedented global economic growth, and a record terms of trade, we have experienced three years of net exports detracting or making no contribution to our growth.
We have also faced declining productivity which of itself impairs our international competitiveness.
And for the last couple of years, slowly but steadily inflation has once again let loose in the Australian economy  -  resulting in inflation numbers for Australia that are significantly above most OECD economies.
And overarching all these challenges are the mega changes represented by the rise of China, the rise of India and the unfolding economic and environmental reality of climate change.
Therefore the national government faces a very full economic policy agenda indeed.
Reinforcing the need for responsible economic management combined with a clear cut strategy for investing in Australia's long term economic future:
     * Where the macroeconomic fundamentals are strong;
     * Where we build world class education, innovation and infrastructure to drive long term productivity growth;
     * Where we intelligently invest in the industries of the future.
 And driving all of these concerns are the underlying needs of Australian working families, both now and into the future.
Today, I would like to talk about the global economic environment, the nature and causes of the inflation challenge that we face, and to outline the Government's five point plan to fight inflation.
It goes without saying that Australia's economic performance is directly shaped by the state of the global economy.
In economic policy there are factors within our control.
Just as there are factors beyond our control  -  factors to which we must remain alert and vigilant in terms of our own economic policy settings.
We are experiencing uncertain times in the global economy.
The US economy is weakening as a result of a severe downturn in its housing market and associated troubles in financial markets.
The Chairman of the US Federal Reserve recently noted that:
“the baseline outlook for real activity in 2008 has worsened and that the downside risks to growth have become more pronounced”
Just two days ago, the Governor of the Reserve Bank, Glenn Stevens delivered a speech noting:
“the US now faces a period of below-average performance as the problems in the housing market are digested”.
There's no doubt that developments in the US housing market pose risks to the global economy, as well as our own.
Already higher financing costs in global financial markets are having real impacts on Australian families through increased mortgage rates imposed by Australia's commercial banks.
Families and businesses who have endured ten official interest rate rises in the last five years certainly won't welcome these rate rises, and neither do I.
The government and the economy's regulatory authorities will continue to monitor these developments carefully.
Consensus forecasts have stated that, in part due to developments in the US economy, economic growth is expected to slow in Japan and Europe.
These developments pose significant challenges for the global growth outlook and for the Australian economy.
But they come at a time where strong economic growth in the Asia-Pacific region is continuing to drive global demand for our mineral and energy resources.
In 2007, emerging economies including China, India, Russia and Brazil, drove two-thirds of the growth in the global economy.
The G3 economies of the US, Japan and the Euro area contributed less than a quarter of global growth.
The World Bank in its Global Economic Prospects publications noted that:
“Resilience in developing economies is cushioning the current slowdown in the United States”.
China is expected to continue to grow at double-digit rates over the next two years.
And China's growth momentum is being increasingly sustained by domestic forces.
Over coming years, developments in China will increasingly shape both global and Australian economic conditions.
The Indian economy has become one of our fastest growing export markets and is expected to continue to post impressive rates of economic growth.
Combined, China and India accounted for around 40 per cent of Australia's export value growth in 2006-07.
Emerging economies such as Russia and Brazil are also expected to continue to contribute to global growth.
The economic expansion within our region has only heightened the need for careful management of our domestic economy.
And the most pressing economic challenge domestically is inflation.
Australia therefore faces conflicting economic currents:
     * A global economy (led by the United States) which appears to be slowing.
     * An ongoing terms of trade boom driven by Asia Pacific economies.
     * And significant domestic inflationary pressures at home.
The inflation problem we currently face has not emerged overnight.
The truth is it has been building for some time.
It cannot be solved overnight.
But we can start immediately.
And we have.
For one and a half years, measures of underlying inflation have been running at towards the upper end of the Reserve Bank's 2 to 3 per cent inflation target band.
This has made the task of monetary policy much, much harder.
Official interest rates have increased ten times since May 2002, of which six of these increases occurred in the last three years.
The minutes of the most recent Reserve Bank Board meeting show that the Board remains concerned about the outlook for inflation, despite recent monetary tightening.
Just this past Friday, in London, Governor Stevens reiterated his concern about inflationary pressures, noting that inflation “is likely to be uncomfortably high in the near term”.
The inflation challenge we face today is a direct consequence of policy neglect in the past, compounded by the terms of trade boom.
Strong global demand for our commodity exports has seen our terms of trade rise to 50 year highs.
This has provided a significant stimulus to our economy  -  boosting employment, company profits and incomes.
The Reserve Bank has estimated that it has boosted real national income by around 8 per cent  -  or the equivalent of around $80 billion in the last year alone.
But at the same time it has brought our economy close to its limits of capacity.
With a highly employed economy, demand created by strong growth in income has generated inflationary pressures.
Put simply, demand growth has outstripped increases in the supply capacity of the economy.
This situation was not helped by lax fiscal policy.
Past fiscal policy settings applied insufficient restraint on unproductive spending.
Since 2004-05 Commonwealth spending has grown on average at over 4 per cent per year in real terms.
This is the fastest growth rate for any four year period in the past decade and a half.
We have the right institutional framework to deal with pressures on monetary policy  -  an independent central bank with an inflation target.
Shortly after taking office, the Governor and the Government announced a number of measures to enhance the independence and transparency of the Reserve Bank, through a new Joint Statement on the Conduct of Monetary Policy.
The new Statement re-affirmed the Government's commitment to the Reserve Bank's 2 to 3 per cent inflation target.
It strengthened the Reserve Bank by enhancing the statutory independence of the Governor and Deputy Governor.
It also incorporated new transparency measures in the Board appointments process, the publication of Board minutes, and a statement following each monthly meeting, irrespective of whether the cash rate was changed.
We recognise the importance of monetary policy for managing demand, but fiscal policy also has a role to play.
It should not be making the job of the Reserve Bank harder.
At a time when the economy is pushing up against the limits of its capacity, we need to be more alert to the impacts of fiscal policy on demand.
Capacity constraints are holding back our economy.
The labour market is the tightest it has been in a generation with unemployment at around 33-year lows.
And while overall participation is at record highs, Australia ranks in the bottom half of OECD economies for prime aged men and women.
Coupled with acute skills shortages in many industries, labour shortages are pushing up the cost of labour.
A lack of investment in skills has also seen weak productivity growth in recent years. Strong growth in wages, without offsetting improvements in labour productivity, adds to price pressures.
A lack of past infrastructure investment has also constrained our ability to boost supply.
With record levels of capacity utilisation businesses have been unable to maximise the opportunities and respond fully to strong demand.
A range of specific factors have also been pushing inflation higher.
Oil prices are being pushed to record highs by ongoing geopolitical tensions, strong demand and supply concerns.
And here at home, the ongoing effects of our devastating drought are leading to higher food prices.
These, of course, are factors over which we have little control.
But with China and India likely to continue to grow strongly, demand side pressures are likely to continue to influence the Australian economy, despite a weakening in the US economy.
This emphasises the need to direct all arms of economic policy towards the things we can influence  -  to take the pressure off demand, reduce costs in the economy through regulatory reform, and further boost the supply side capacity of the Australian economy to alleviate inflationary pressures.
That's why our Government in its earliest days has declared war on inflation.
This will be a tough fight, but unless we engage this fight, the consequences for businesses, employees and families will be very negative indeed.
We recognise that with an economy operating at close to full capacity the only way we will be able to achieve sustained improvements in incomes is to direct our policy efforts towards expanding the productive capacity of the economy.
While they presided over unprecedented boom times off the back of record terms of trade, the Howard/Costello Government failed to make critical investments in skills and infrastructure.
Over the last three years the Reserve Bank of Australia warned on more than 20 separate occasions that skill shortages and capacity constraints were threatening growth and contributing to inflation.
The Howard/Costello Government's failure to heed these warnings allowed inflationary pressures to build.
Today, measures of underlying inflation have been running at around 3 per cent  -  the top of the Reserve Bank's 2 to 3 per cent inflation target band.
The Howard/Costello Government failed to act on their inflation problem.
Instead, they ignored it.
Not only did they ignore it, through their inaction they compounded the problem.
Thereby creating risks to our long term economic competitiveness.
Following the release of the of June quarter inflation figures in July 2007, the former Treasurer declared that:
“...inflation is right where we want it”
This came at a time when measures of underlying inflation were running at 2.8 per cent  -  at the upper end of the Reserve Bank's 2-3 per cent target band.
But one month later the Reserve Bank was forced to tighten monetary policy because of a heightened inflationary environment.
The inflation challenge we face today is very much the Liberals parting gift to the Australian economy.
A decade of neglect of the twin investment deficits in infrastructure and skills  -  has meant our economy has been ill prepared to deal with the demand surge flowing from the terms of trade boom.
For over a decade, the past Government did not put forward a strategic vision for the tax system.
For over a decade, Government spending was not directed to the challenges on the horizon or to boosting the productive capacity of our economy.
A surge in revenues year after year, and handouts before every election.
This has left us with an extended period of elevated inflation.
Businesses that I speak to right across the country  -  small, medium and large  -  consider finding suitably qualified employees to be one of their biggest difficulties.
The former Department of Employment and Workplace Relations identified persistent skills shortages in trades and the professions over much of the past ten years.
Our economy has also been held back as bulk commodity ships queue off our ports, urban congestion clogs up our major cities and both rural and urban areas experience chronic water shortages.
CEDA estimates that Australia's infrastructure backlog is costing us around 0.8 per cent of GDP a year in lost production  -  that is the equivalent of $8 billion a year.
There are few other states that have felt the impact of these deficits more than Western Australia.
Unemployment in Western Australia is the lowest of any state  -  at 3.1 per cent.
The growth in job vacancies in Western Australia is far higher than in any other State, with vacancies growing by 36.3 per cent over the last year, reflecting the difficulties that employers have in filling jobs.
Iron ore miners in Western Australia report that rail and port infrastructure facilities are stretched to their limits.
The consequence of this failure to address the skills crisis, to lift workforce participation and plan for the demands on critical infrastructure, has created a set of deep underlying drivers of Australia's current inflation problem.
Yet these pressures were aggravated even further by an increasingly indisciplined approach to fiscal policy on the part of our predecessors.
A Five Point Plan to Fight Inflation
The government is not in the business attributing all of Australia's inflationary pressures to the policy failures of our predecessors.
As I have already noted, a number of these pressures have been created by external factors.
But equally, responsibility must be accepted for domestic policy complacency and failure where it has occurred.
Policy failure on skills, workforce participation, infrastructure and fiscal policy are clear cut cases of neglect.
There is however absolutely no point in decrying our predecessors culpability on this unless we at the same are pointing the way forward.
That's why today, I would like to chart the way forward, and set out a broad five point plan to fight the fight against inflation.
A plan that addresses both demand side and supply side pressures on inflation.
A plan that uses all the tools available to us  -  both macroeconomic and microeconomic levers.
First, we will ensure the Government takes the pressure off demand by running a strong budget surplus.
This will help make the task of the Reserve Bank easier.
Second, in the period ahead we will examine all options to provide real incentive to encourage private savings.
Third, we will be unfolding our plan for tackling chronic skills shortages in the economy.
Fourth, we will provide national leadership to tackle infrastructure bottlenecks.
And fifth, we will provide practical ways of helping people re-enter the workforce and remove disincentives to working hard, to lift workforce participation.
By exercising restraint  -  our plan aims to do everything it can to ease the pressure on inflation and interest rates.
And for the longer term, we have a plan to deal with the chronic investment deficits in the capacity side of the economy  -  in skills and infrastructure.
1. Fiscal Restraint
The first part of our plan is a hardline attitude to fiscal restraint.
Prior to the election, we ran as fiscal conservatives.
With the election behind us, we now intend to govern as fiscal conservatives.
The sensible thing for government to do is not contribute to demand through excessive government spending.
For an economy that is now enjoying its 17th year of economic growth, it is prudent for the Government to be running a sizeable budget surplus.
Fiscal policy should not complicate the task of monetary policy.
It should make the job of the Reserve Bank easier, not harder.
That is why the Government is committed to strengthening the budget position as well as improving the quality of public spending.
At the time of the 2007-08 Budget, the budget surplus for 2008-09 was 1.1 per cent of GDP.
At the time of the Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook and the Pre-Election Fiscal and Economic Outlook, the budget surplus for 2008-09 was revised to 1.2 per cent of GDP.
We need to do better than that, and so long as economic conditions hold up we will do better than that.
Today I announce a fiscal target that will guide our budgetary process and decision making.
The Government aims to deliver a budget surplus of at least 1.5 per cent of GDP in 2008-09, provided growth prospects remain as currently anticipated.
This will require a determined, disciplined approach to spending and a hardline approach to savings.
Our ‘razor gang' is currently working to cut wasteful spending, and find additional savings over and above the $10 billion across the forward estimates that we have already identified.
This is a comprehensive review of spending.
Department by department, program by program, line by line.
It is essential that we spend public money wisely.
We understand that it is not just the overall budget position that matters.
The quality of government spending is equally important.
Added to this is adopting the discipline of allowing automatic stabilisers that are built into the budget to do their job.
In the current environment, this means banking upward revisions to revenue, should they occur.
It is appropriate the budget position is allowed to vary with economic conditions.
Allowing automatic stabilisers that are built into the budget to do their job will help alleviate inflationary pressures.
But getting our fiscal house in order is only a first step.
2. Private demand and saving for the future
The second component of our five point plan is Government action to foster a culture of savings.
Providing attractive incentives to save can help take the pressure off inflation, help people save for their future, and help lift national savings.
This is particularly important at a time when we face elevated inflationary pressures.
We have already proposed First Home Saver Accounts, to help young homebuyers save for the future.
The Government believes there is more to be done in the area of building a national savings culture  -  and we will have more to say about this in the months ahead.
3. Tackling chronic skills shortages
To support these measures  -  we need to deal with the critical supply side constraints of today.
The third point of our plan is to start addressing the economy's skills deficit.
Targeted investments in training will help provide labour resources to sectors experiencing chronic shortages.
At the election we put forward our Skilling Australia for the Future policy, to help fund the delivery of 450,000 training places over the next 4 years, including 65,000 extra apprenticeships.
And we have already gotten to work.
Last week, I announced that the first 20,000 of the additional training places will be available by April this year.
I have also asked the Deputy Prime Minister to consult with relevant state and territory organisations and Industry Skills Councils to seek their urgent cooperation in allocating the first tranche of training places to industries experiencing the most acute shortages.
The mining and construction sectors  -  so pivotal to West Australian economy - are likely to be prime candidates.
The mining industry is currently experiencing the highest vacancy to employment ratio, with around 3.7 vacancies for every 100 people employed in the industry.
Wages growth is strongest in the mining industry, at 5.4 per cent through the year to the September quarter 2007.
The construction industry is also experiencing labour constraints.
Wages growth in construction is at 4.8 per cent through the year to September 2007. The industry also has the highest proportion of employees with a certificate as their highest qualification, at 45.7 per cent.
Meaning that it will benefit greatly from additional training places at certificate level.
The government also announced before the election that it will establish Skills Australia as an independent statutory body to advise the government on skills shortage issues.
Given the urgency of the challenge, new legislation to establish Skills Australia will be fast-tracked and brought before Parliament as a priority.
The government will also shortly consider draft guidelines for the Trades Training Centre in Schools program, with schools able to apply for funding from March 2008.
The Program will give all students the best chance of finishing school and moving into the workforce.
The nation also needs to deal with real economic challenges represented by current skills shortages through the relevant skills categories of the Australian migration program.
We will also deliver further measures in higher education to address skills shortages in maths, science, nursing and early childhood education.
4. National leadership to tackle infrastructure bottlenecks
The fourth point of our plan is to tackle infrastructure bottlenecks.
Infrastructure is the other major area where our economy is facing a deficit that has not been addressed.
Bottlenecks in our supply chains and urban congestion slow our economy down  -  and are in large part the product of poor leadership, planning and coordination of critical national infrastructure.
Almost immediately, the Government will move to establish Infrastructure Australia.
Infrastructure Australia will undertake an audit of national infrastructure in the areas of transport, energy, communications and water.
It will develop national infrastructure priorities.
And it will provide advice on policy and regulatory reforms to improve the efficient use of infrastructure networks.
In keeping with this, the Government will also work closely with its state and territory counterparts to develop appropriate national frameworks for infrastructure delivery.
An Infrastructure Working Group has been established by COAG with the dual objectives of better coordination of infrastructure planning and investment across the nation; and identifying and removing blockages to productive investment in infrastructure.
Well targeted, integrated, efficient infrastructure will help boost our productivity  -  ensuring that goods and services get to market as quickly as possible, and people get to and from work with minimal delay.
5. Lifting workforce participation
The fifth element of our plan to fight inflation is to put in place practical measures to help people re-enter the workforce and remove disincentives to working hard.
The Government recognises the importance of participation in lifting the productive capacity of the economy  -  this means knocking down the barriers which prevent people who would like to, from entering the workforce.
Ensuring that parents have access to affordable, high quality child care is one vital way my Government will support the workforce participation of parents with children.
From 1 July 2008 the Government will increase the Child Care Tax Rebate from 30 per cent to 50 per cent of out of pocket child care costs, covering up to $7,500 per child per annum.
This is in addition to providing support to families through the Child Care Benefit.
The Child Care Tax Rebate will also be paid quarterly rather than annually so that families can receive this assistance closer to the time they pay their child care fees.
The Government will also improve access to child care, including for working families, through the establishment of up to 260 new long day care centres on school, TAFE, university and community sites.
Almost 100,000 Australian parents indicate that they are out of the workforce due to problems with formal child care.
The Government's child care policies will help thousands of this group get straight back into work, helping to lift the productive output of the economy.
The Government's skills and training policies will also lift workforce participation.
The 20,000 skills training places which will become available in April will all be directed towards people marginally attached to the labour force.
By ensuring more young Australians stay in school for longer, Trades Training Centres in schools will also increase the likelihood that thousands of school levers are able to move straight into work.
Ensuring that hard working individuals are rewarded for the effort is also critical to enhancing workforce participation.
The Government's tax relief for working families is specifically designed to encourage people into the work force, boosting participation and productivity, and ultimately helping to fight inflation.
We recognise that people have worked hard to make the economy strong, and they need to be rewarded.
The Government believes that the best way to encourage more people into work is to provide better incentives that reward their effort.
Lifting the Low Income Tax Offset, increasing the threshold of the 30 cent rate, reducing effective marginal tax rates and genuine tax reforms (as we articulated during the election campaign) will encourage more people into the workforce in the medium-term.
Initiatives that provide better incentives to bring people into the workforce and remove disincentives to working hard are critical if we are to address the capacity constraints hampering our economy and take the heat out of inflation.
Fighting inflation is the central challenge facing our economy today.
It is the central challenge facing the Government I lead.
The truth is we have inherited a significant inflation problem from our predecessors.
We recognise that inflationary pressures have taken a long time to build and they will take a long time to turn around.
But we have begun work immediately.
Today I've announced a comprehensive five point strategy to fight inflation by:
     * Embarking on a hardline approach to fiscal discipline - delivering a budget surplus of at least 1.5 per cent of GDP in 2008-09, provided growth prospects remain as currently anticipated.
     * Examining all options to provide real incentive to encourage private savings.
     * Tackling chronic skill shortages in the economy.
     * Providing national leadership to tackle infrastructure bottlenecks.
     * Providing practical ways of helping people re-enter the workforce and removing disincentives to working hard - to lift workforce participation.
Fighting the fight against inflation is a core part of the Government's economic strategy.
Building world class education, innovation and infrastructure to meet the needs of the 21st century and to deliver long term productivity growth represents a further pillar of our strategy.
Together with investing in the new industries of the future.
Our government looks forward to meeting many of these challenges in year ahead.


Your Excellency, Mrs Jeffery, distinguished guests, members of the great Australian family, including the respected family of Aboriginal Australia, within our nation.
Australia Day. There is I think, a great, unrestrained, almost unbridled optimism, almost joy - in fact, unbridled joy - about the way in which we celebrate this day, Australia day. I think that says something about the people we are. It says something about  -  we are a nation of youth, a nation of energy and a nation of ideas and of optimism.
A nation which believes its best days lie ahead of us. And its not just here in the nation's Capital  -  but its wonderful to see so many thousands turn out here in this great community of Canberra today.
Its from Cape York to Cape Lewin, its from the vast expanses of the inland through to the foreshores of Sydney Harbour. Our cities, our towns, the bush. It's the backyard barbeques and its learned academic symposia. All celebrating this one thing. This nation, this country this idea that we call Australia.
Within that we have so much to celebrate and be proud of in terms of this nations achievements. For this day, Australia Day is about celebrating our heritage, its about pausing for a moment to reflect on how we best chart our future.
When we reflect on this heritage we are proud, intensely proud of this nation's Aboriginal heritage. We stand in awe at the dreaming. We stand in awe at the fact that among us, is the world's oldest continuing culture. We stand in awe as we hear the songs and the sounds and the stories and the music which have come down to us from antiquity. We stand in awe at the rock art in the Kimberley's and beyond. Rock art older, more ancient that anything we find in the ancient caves of France and of Spain. There is much to celebrate. In terms of Aboriginal Australia, giving us so much of our continuing identity as Australians.  And we celebrate the fact that this great people have endured, have endured the shock of European settlement and we are honoured to share this great south land with Indigenous Australia.
We celebrate also the great pioneers and settlers who have opened up this great vast land, we celebrate those who have crafted this great Australian democracy, those who have brought to us the great heritage of the independence of the law.
We celebrate those who have gone out and defended this democracy. Our men and our women in uniform, in countless conflicts through the decades of this nation's federated history and still today in fields as far flung as Iraq and Afghanistan and Timor and the Solomons and the Sudan.
We celebrate the achievements of our farmers who have been doing it tough, our business leaders, those who fight for the interests of working families. Those who are out there are as creators and artists and scientists and innovators, our great sporting men and women. We have so much to celebrate.
In celebrating this, we turn our gaze to the future. A young country with so many pages yet to be written in our national story.
The challenges are great, you hear us speak of them so often. Challenges of climate change, challenges of global economic uncertainty, challenges of an ageing population. Challenges far and wide and deep.
But we are fortified in meeting these challenges of the future by this: that we are a people energised by the values which have been written large across the fabric of our history. Which form the continuing thread across that fabric. Values which speak to our independence, our robust sense of freedom. Values which speak of our reward of hard work, achievement and success. But values equally which go to our ability to show care and compassion for those who need a helping hand.
And the great idea and the great concept, the great reality that is Australia is that we as a people and as a nation bring these values together and say in one sentence, we can work hard for ourselves and our families and not see that as a contradiction, in looking after our fellow human beings  -  working hard for our community and for our country.
We, in this great south land bring these great stories together in one people.
Of course, when you go to the challenges of the future and see how rich and deep and sometimes, daunting they appear, we must have about us this idea to build a modern Australia, drawing on these great values which have informed our past and ensuring that this nation is equipped to deal with all the challenges which lie ahead of us.
As Prime Minister of this country I am confident that we can do that. But we can do that by this and this alone, reaching out and calling forth the talents of the nation.
As I stand here and look at this crowd of assembled achievers and those of you in worker day lives across this community in Canberra and across the nation, everyone has something to offer this nation of ours Australia.
And we can only build a modern Australia capable of facing the challenges of the future if we as the nation call forth the ideas, the intelligence and the energies and the enthusiasm of the nation. I said last night that I do not believe that Government has a monopoly on wisdom, and those in the crowd quickly called back  -  in fact government has no monopoly on any wisdom. And there may be some truth in that.
But it goes to a deep Australian truth is so much wisdom lies beyond the doors of Government and my invitation on this our national day is to come forth from the nation with the ideas and the talents and the energies which you wish to contribute to the nation's building.
Which brings me to our new citizens today. Today across Australia some 14 000 people are becoming new members of our national family. On behalf of the Government of the nation, I have one word to say. Welcome.
You are welcome to join this great Australian family. Each and every one of  you. Because in charting our future history we need to draw on your talents, your enthusiasm, your energy and your ability. Each and every one of you.
Those 14 000 people who become members of the Australian family are joined by one in Emerald in flood stricken Queensland, where there is an Australia Day ceremony today. Put your hands together for the people of Emerald.
We welcomed and honoured the excellence of the Australian of the Year and the Australians of the Year last night and those who reached the finals in the great national competition. But their achievement and their success is made real for us because they have about them, a culture of service. They wish to serve the community they wish to serve the nation.
And as I look to those who are becoming members of the Australian community today, we welcome you, but there is a condition.
We want you to serve as well. Bring forth your talents, your energy, your enthusiasm to the great task of building our nation into the future. And that's all we ask.
As we look ahead to the future, let us have about us this idea, build this modern Australia drawing on the values which have fortified our past and which will fortify our future. And do so in a way which carves out a nation in the future which remains more than ever the envy of the world, and always with this idea. To remain as Australia, an overwhelming force for good in the world.
Let's together, advance Australia and let's together advance Australia fair.
I thank you.


I begin by honouring the traditional owners of the land on which this parliament now sits.
I begin also by honouring the traditional owners of all the lands across this continent, Australia.
And I thank the traditional owners here for their welcome to country, the warmth of that welcome, the beautiful traditional message stick, with which I have been presented.
Exactly 100 years ago the land on which we stand was chosen as the site as the nation's first capital. Eighty years ago, we build an old Parliament House and 20 years ago, we built this new great house of the Australian democracy.
Yet the human history of this land stretches back thousands of years through the dreamtime.
The histories of the Ngunnawal and Walgalu  -  and to the west, the Wiradjuri; to the east, on the coast, the Yuin; to the north, the Gundungurra; and to the south, the Ngarigo - a thousand generations or more.
And we who have come to this land more recently, perhaps for five, maybe six, even seven.
Despite this antiquity among us, and despite the fact that parliaments have been meeting here for the better part of a century, today is the first time in our history that as we open the parliament of the nation, that we are officially welcomed to country by the first Australians of this nation.
And Matilda, I thank you for the welcome.
For that welcome, we are all here, Senators and Members, truly honoured.
In 1927, when we opened the old parliament, no Aboriginal or Torres Straight Islander people were invited.  There was no welcome to country, they were not welcome at all. No place at the national table as we began the national parliament in this place for the first time.
But one man, Jimmy Clements, came, and stood alone, referred to by the Canberra Times in 1927 as, and I quote, “a lone representative of a fast vanishing race”, unquote.
I celebrate the fact that indigenous Australia is alive, well, and with us for the future.
Today we begin with one small step, to set right the wrongs of the past. And in this ceremonial way, it is a significant and symbolic step.
And let us resolve here, as Members and Senators and Members of this great Parliament of the Commonwealth, that whoever forms future Governments of the nation, let this become a permanent part of our ceremonial celebration of the Australian democracy.
Incorporating the ceremonial of the dreaming from antiquity into the ceremonial of this great democracy.
It's taken 41 parliaments to get here. We can be a bit slow sometimes. But we got here. And, when it comes to the parliaments of the future, this will become part and parcel of the fabric of our celebration of Australia in all of its unity and all of its diversity.
Our challenge this week, then is to write a new page in the country's history, and this is one small step. But for that page to be truly written, it must be written between ourselves and indigenous Australia, and within this parliament between those who are Government and those who are Opposition. And it is in that spirit that I invite the Leader of the Opposition to support my remarks.


  - I move:
That today we honour the Indigenous peoples of this land, the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
We reflect on their past mistreatment.
We reflect in particular on the mistreatment of those who were Stolen Generations - this blemished chapter in our nation's history.
The time has now come for the nation to turn a new page in Australia's history by righting the wrongs of the past and so moving forward with confidence to the future.
We apologise for the laws and policies of successive Parliaments and governments that have inflicted profound grief, suffering and loss on these our fellow Australians.
We apologise especially for the removal of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children from their families, their communities and their country.
For the pain, suffering and hurt of these Stolen Generations, their descendants and for their families left behind, we say sorry.
To the mothers and the fathers, the brothers and the sisters, for the breaking up of families and communities, we say sorry.
And for the indignity and degradation thus inflicted on a proud people and a proud culture, we say sorry.
We the Parliament of Australia respectfully request that this apology be received in the spirit in which it is offered as part of the healing of the nation.
For the future we take heart; resolving that this new page in the history of our great continent can now be written.
We today take this first step by acknowledging the past and laying claim to a future that embraces all Australians.
A future where this Parliament resolves that the injustices of the past must never, never happen again.
A future where we harness the determination of all Australians, Indigenous and non-Indigenous, to close the gap that lies between us in life expectancy, educational achievement and economic opportunity.
A future where we embrace the possibility of new solutions to enduring problems where old approaches have failed.
A future based on mutual respect, mutual resolve and mutual responsibility.
A future where all Australians, whatever their origins, are truly equal partners, with equal opportunities and with an equal stake in shaping the next chapter in the history of this great country, Australia.
 There comes a time in the history of nations when their peoples must become fully reconciled to their past if they are to go forward with confidence to embrace their future. Our nation, Australia, has reached such a time. And that is why the parliament is today here assembled: to deal with this unfinished business of the nation, to remove a great stain from the nation's soul and, in a true spirit of reconciliation, to open a new chapter in the history of this great land, Australia.
Last year I made a commitment to the Australian people that if we formed the next government of the Commonwealth we would in parliament say sorry to the Stolen Generations. Today I honour that commitment. I said we would do so early in the life of the new parliament. Again, today I honour that commitment by doing so at the commencement of this the 42nd parliament of the Commonwealth. Because the time has come, well and truly come, for all peoples of our great country, for all citizens of our great Commonwealth, for all Australians - those who are Indigenous and those who are not - to come together to reconcile and together build a new future for our nation.
Some have asked, ‘Why apologise?' Let me begin to answer by telling the parliament just a little of one person's story - an elegant, eloquent and wonderful woman in her 80s, full of life, full of funny stories, despite what has happened in her life's journey. A woman who has travelled a long way to be with us today, a member of the Stolen Generation who shared some of her story with me when I called around to see her just a few days ago. Nungala Fejo, as she prefers to be called, was born in the late 1920s. She remembers her earliest childhood days living with her family and her community in a bush camp just outside Tennant Creek. She remembers the love and the warmth and the kinship of those days long ago, including traditional dancing around the camp fire at night. She loved the dancing. She remembers once getting into strife when, as a four-year-old girl, she insisted on dancing with the male tribal elders rather than just sitting and watching the men, as the girls were supposed to do.
But then, sometime around 1932, when she was about four, she remembers the coming of the welfare men. Her family had feared that day and had dug holes in the creek bank where the children could run and hide. What they had not expected was that the white welfare men did not come alone. They brought a truck, they brought two white men and an Aboriginal stockman on horseback cracking his stockwhip. The kids were found; they ran for their mothers, screaming, but they could not get away. They were herded and piled onto the back of the truck. Tears flowing, her mum tried clinging to the sides of the truck as her children were taken away to the Bungalow in Alice, all in the name of protection.
A few years later, government policy changed. Now the children would be handed over to the missions to be cared for by the churches. But which church would care for them? The kids were simply told to line up in three lines. Nanna Fejo and her sister stood in the middle line, her older brother and cousin on her left. Those on the left were told that they had become Catholics, those in the middle Methodists and those on the right Church of England. That is how the complex questions of post-reformation theology were resolved in the Australian outback in the 1930s. It was as crude as that. She and her sister were sent to a Methodist mission on Goulburn Island and then Croker Island. Her Catholic brother was sent to work at a cattle station and her cousin to a Catholic mission.
Nanna Fejo's family had been broken up for a second time. She stayed at the mission until after the war, when she was allowed to leave for a prearranged job as a domestic in Darwin. She was 16. Nanna Fejo never saw her mum again. After she left the mission, her brother let her know that her mum had died years before, a broken woman fretting for the children that had literally been ripped away from her.
I asked Nanna Fejo what she would have me say today about her story. She thought for a few moments then said that what I should say today was that all mothers are important. And she added: ‘Families - keeping them together is very important. It's a good thing that you are surrounded by love and that love is passed down the generations. That's what gives you happiness.' As I left, later on, Nanna Fejo took one of my staff aside, wanting to make sure that I was not too hard on the Aboriginal stockman who had hunted those kids down all those years ago. The stockman had found her again decades later, this time himself to say, ‘Sorry.' And remarkably, extraordinarily, she had forgiven him.
Nanna Fejo's is just one story. There are thousands, tens of thousands of them: stories of forced separation of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children from their mums and dads over the better part of a century. Some of these stories are graphically told in Bringing Them Home, the report commissioned in 1995 by Prime Minister Keating and received in 1997 by Prime Minister Howard. There is something terribly primal about these firsthand accounts. The pain is searing; it screams from the pages. The hurt, the humiliation, the degradation and the sheer brutality of the act of physically separating a mother from her children is a deep assault on our senses and on our most elemental humanity.
These stories cry out to be heard; they cry out for an apology. Instead, from the nation's parliament there has been a stony and stubborn and deafening silence for more than a decade. A view that somehow we, the parliament, should suspend our most basic instincts of what is right and what is wrong. A view that, instead, we should look for any pretext to push this great wrong to one side, to leave it languishing with the historians, the academics and the cultural warriors, as if the Stolen Generations are little more than an interesting sociological phenomenon. But the Stolen Generations are not intellectual curiosities. They are human beings, human beings who have been damaged deeply by the decisions of parliaments and governments. But, as of today, the time for denial, the time for delay, has at last come to an end.
The nation is demanding of its political leadership to take us forward. Decency, human decency, universal human decency, demands that the nation now steps forward to right a historical wrong. That is what we are doing in this place today. But should there still be doubts as to why we must now act. Let the parliament reflect for a moment on the following facts: that, between 1910 and 1970, between 10 and 30 per cent of Indigenous children were forcibly taken from their mothers and fathers. That, as a result, up to 50,000 children were forcibly taken from their families. That this was the product of the deliberate, calculated policies of the state as reflected in the explicit powers given to them under statute. That this policy was taken to such extremes by some in administrative authority that the forced extractions of children of so-called ‘mixed lineage' were seen as part of a broader policy of dealing with ‘the problem of the Aboriginal population'.
One of the most notorious examples of this approach was from the Northern Territory Protector of Natives, who stated, and I quote:
Generally by the fifth and invariably by the sixth generation, all native characteristics of the Australian aborigine are eradicated. The problem of our half-castes - 
to quote the protector - 
will quickly be eliminated by the complete disappearance of the black race, and the swift submergence of their progeny in the white ...
The Western Australian Protector of Natives expressed not dissimilar views, expounding them at length in Canberra in 1937 at the first national conference on Indigenous affairs that brought together the Commonwealth and state protectors of natives. These are uncomfortable things to be brought out into the light. They are not pleasant. They are profoundly disturbing. But we must acknowledge these facts if we are to deal once and for all with the argument that the policy of generic forced separation was somehow well motivated, justified by its historical context and, as a result, unworthy of any apology today.
Then we come to the argument of intergenerational responsibility, also used by some to argue against giving an apology today. But let us remember the fact that the forced removal of Aboriginal children was happening as late as the early 1970s. The 1970s is not exactly a point in remote antiquity. There are still serving members of this parliament who were first elected to this place in the early 1970s. It is well within the adult memory span of many of us. The uncomfortable truth for us all is that the parliaments of the nation, individually and collectively, enacted statutes and delegated authority under those statutes that made the forced removal of children on racial grounds fully lawful.
There is a further reason for an apology as well: it is that reconciliation is in fact an expression of a core value of our nation - and that value is a fair go for all. There is a deep and abiding belief in the Australian community that, for the Stolen Generations, there was no fair go at all. And there is a pretty basic Aussie belief that says it is time to put right this most outrageous of wrongs. It is for these reasons, quite apart from concerns of fundamental human decency, that the governments and parliaments of this nation must make this apology. Because, put simply, the laws that our parliaments enacted made the Stolen Generations possible. We, the parliaments of the nation, are ultimately responsible, not those who gave effect to our laws, the problem lay with the laws themselves. As has been said of settler societies elsewhere, we are the bearers of many blessings from our ancestors and therefore we must also be the bearer of their burdens as well. Therefore, for our nation, the course of action is clear. Therefore for our people, the course of action is clear. And that is, to deal now with what has become one of the darkest chapters in Australia's history. In doing so, we are doing more than contending with the facts, the evidence and the often rancorous public debate. In doing so, we are also wrestling with our own soul. This is not, as some would argue, a black-armband view of history; it is just the truth: the cold, confronting, uncomfortable truth. Facing with it, dealing with it, moving on from it. And until we fully confront that truth, there will always be a shadow hanging over us and our future as a fully united and fully reconciled people. It is time to reconcile. It is time to recognise the injustices of the past. It is time to say sorry. It is time to move forward together.
To the Stolen Generations, I say the following: as Prime Minister of Australia, I am sorry. On behalf of the Government of Australia, I am sorry. On behalf of the Parliament of Australia, I am sorry. And I offer you this apology without qualification. We apologise for the hurt, the pain and suffering we, the parliament, have caused you by the laws that previous parliaments have enacted. We apologise for the indignity, the degradation and the humiliation these laws embodied. We offer this apology to the mothers, the fathers, the brothers, the sisters, the families and the communities whose lives were ripped apart by the actions of successive governments under successive parliaments. In making this apology, I would also like to speak personally to the members of the Stolen Generation and their families: to those here today, so many of you; to those listening across the nation - from Yuendumu, in the central west of the Northern Territory, to Yabara, in North Queensland, and to Pitjantjatjara in South Australia.
I know that, in offering this apology on behalf of the government and the parliament, there is nothing I can say today that can take away the pain you have suffered personally. Whatever words I speak today, I cannot undo that. Words alone are not that powerful. Grief is a very personal thing. I say to non-Indigenous Australians listening today who may not fully understand why what we are doing is so important, I ask those non-Indigenous Australians to imagine for a moment if this had happened to you. I say to honourable members here present: imagine if this had happened to us. Imagine the crippling effect. Imagine how hard it would be to forgive. But my proposal is this: if the apology we extend today is accepted in the spirit of reconciliation, in which it is offered, we can today resolve together that there be a new beginning for Australia. And it is to such a new beginning that I believe the nation is now calling us.
Australians are a passionate lot. We are also a very practical lot. For us, symbolism is important but, unless the great symbolism of reconciliation is accompanied by an even greater substance, it is little more than a clanging gong. It is not sentiment that makes history; it is our actions that make history. Today's apology, however inadequate, is aimed at righting past wrongs. It is also aimed at building a bridge between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians - a bridge based on a real respect rather than a thinly veiled contempt. Our challenge for the future is now to cross that bridge and, in so doing, embrace a new partnership between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians. Embracing, as part of that partnership, expanded link-up and other critical services to help the Stolen Generations to trace their families, if at all possible, and to provide dignity to their lives. But the core of this partnership for the future is to closing the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians on life expectancy, educational achievement and employment opportunities. This new partnership on closing the gap will set concrete targets for the future: within a decade to halve the widening gap in literacy, numeracy and employment outcomes and opportunities for Indigenous children, within a decade to halve the appalling gap in infant mortality rates between Indigenous and non-Indigenous children and, within a generation, to close the equally appalling 17-year life gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous when it comes when it comes to overall life expectancy.
The truth is: a business as usual approach towards Indigenous Australians is not working. Most old approaches are not working. We need a new beginning. A new beginning which contains real measures of policy success or policy failure. A new beginning, a new partnership, on closing the gap with sufficient flexibility not to insist on a one-size-fits-all approach for each of the hundreds of remote and regional Indigenous communities across the country but instead allows flexible, tailored, local approaches to achieve commonly-agreed national objectives that lie at the core of our proposed new partnership. And a new beginning that draws intelligently on the experiences of new policy settings across the nation. However, unless we as a parliament set a destination for the nation, we have no clear point to guide our policy, our programs or our purpose; no centralised organising principle.
So let us resolve today to begin with the little children - a fitting place to start on this day of apology for the Stolen Generations. Let us resolve over the next five years to have every Indigenous four-year-old in a remote Aboriginal community enrolled and attending a proper early childhood education centre or opportunity and engaged in proper preliteracy and prenumeracy programs. Let us resolve to build new educational opportunities for these little ones, year by year, step by step, following the completion of their crucial preschool year. Let us resolve to use this systematic approach to building future educational opportunities for Indigenous children to provide proper primary and preventive health care for the same children, to begin the task of rolling back the obscenity that we find today in infant mortality rates in remote Indigenous communities - up to four times higher than in other communities.
None of this will be easy. Most of it will be hard - very hard. But none of it, none of it, is impossible, and all of it is achievable with clear goals, clear thinking, and by placing an absolute premium on respect, cooperation and mutual responsibility as the guiding principles of this new partnership on closing the gap. The mood of the nation is for reconciliation now, between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians. The mood of the nation on Indigenous policy and politics is now very simple. The nation is calling on us, the politicians, to move beyond our infantile bickering, our point-scoring and our mindlessly partisan politics and elevate at least this one core area of national responsibility to a rare position beyond the partisan divide. Surely this is the spirit, the unfulfilled spirit, of the 1967 referendum. Surely, at least from this day forward, we should give it a go.
So let me take this one step further to take what some may see as a piece of political posturing and make a practical proposal to the opposition on this day, the first full sitting day of the new parliament. I said before the election the nation needed a kind of war cabinet on parts of Indigenous policy, because the challenges are too great and the consequences too great to just allow it all to become a political football, as it has been so often in the past. I therefore propose a joint policy commission, to be led by the Leader of the Opposition and myself and, with a mandate to develop and implement - to begin with - an effective housing strategy for remote communities over the next five years. It will be consistent with the government's policy framework, a new partnership for closing the gap. If this commission operates well, I then propose that it work on the further task of constitutional recognition of the first Australians, consistent with the longstanding platform commitments of my party and the pre-election position of the opposition. This would probably be desirable in any event because, unless such a proposition were absolutely bipartisan, it would fail at a referendum. As I have said before, the time has come for new approaches to enduring problems. And working constructively together on such defined projects, I believe, would meet with the support of the nation. It is time for fresh ideas to fashion the nation's future.
Today the parliament has come together to right a great wrong. We have come together to deal with the past so that we might fully embrace the future. And we have had sufficient audacity of faith to advance a pathway to that future, with arms extended rather than with fists still clenched. So let us seize the day. Let it not become a moment of mere sentimental reflection. Let us take it with both hands and allow this day, this day of national reconciliation, to become one of those rare moments in which we might just be able to transform the way in which the nation thinks about itself, whereby the injustice administered to these Stolen Generations in the name of these, our parliaments, causes all of us to reappraise, at the deepest level of our beliefs, the real possibility of reconciliation writ large. Reconciliation across all Indigenous Australia. Reconciliation across the entire history of the often bloody encounter between those who emerged from the Dreamtime a thousand generations ago and those who, like me, came across the seas only yesterday. Reconciliation which opens up whole new possibilities for the future.
For the nation to bring the first two centuries of our settled history to a close, as we begin a new chapter and which we embrace with pride, admiration and awe these great and ancient cultures we are blessed, truly blessed, to have among us. Cultures that provide a unique, uninterrupted human thread linking our Australian continent to the most ancient prehistory of our planet. And growing from this new respect, to see our Indigenous brothers and sisters with fresh eyes, with new eyes, and with our minds wide open as to how we might tackle, together, the great practical challenges that Indigenous Australia faces in the future.
So let us turn this page together: Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians, Government and Opposition, Commonwealth and State, and write this new chapter in our nation's story together. First Australians, First Fleeters, and those who first took the Oath of Allegiance just a few weeks ago. Let's grasp this opportunity to craft a new future for this great land: Australia. I commend the motion to the House.
Video and Audio of the National Apology to the Stolen Generations is  available on the Australia.gov.au website.


We are gathered here in this place with a single and sacred purpose.
And that is to honour those of our nation's sons and daughters who have served our nation in uniform.
From the killing fields of the Western Front.
The unspeakable brutality of Sandakan.
The impossible war that was Vietnam.
And so to the living dangers of today as the grandsons and great-grandsons of ANZAC once again do their duty  -  this time in theatres spread from the Sudan to the Solomons.
I believe there is no higher calling in the life of the nation than to serve the nation in uniform.
The military life summons forth the most elemental of human virtues: service; sacrifice; self-sacrifice; courage; determination and endurance.
And all given shape by an old fashioned (some might say, unfashionable, but I for one do not) patriotism  -  a deep reverence for this great land Australia and the great values for which we stand.
I say all this as one who has never worn the uniform  -  but as one who over the years has spent many, many days in this great memorial studying the lives of those who have.
For Australians, there is a raw emotion to this place. It is impossible to leave this place and not be moved by it.
A deep sense of loss.
A deep sense of pride.
And yes, a deep sense of hope  -  as we walk silently past the names of the fallen - that their sacrifice should never be in vain and that our duty to them is to remain forever vigilant.
Some nations were forged in war. Ours was not.
Some nations have been rent asunder by war. Ours has not.
Other nations have been of necessity defended in war. And ours has been one. And we, with the support of our great American ally, prevailed.
This national experience has shaped us all.
The first duty of any Australian Government must be for the proper defence of the nation.
Past governments have accepted this duty.
The government I lead accepts this duty.
As will those who come after me.
It is a solemn duty.
It is the core business of the nation.
The security of the nation is the cornerstone on which all else is built.
That is why, while we must cut our cloth in the other departments of state to meet the economic circumstances of our time, we must ensure that those charged with the planning of our future defence can do so with certainty.
And that also is the Australian Government's resolve.
That the nation's defence budget continues to grow with certainty and predictability.
Since its opening in 1941, this great War Memorial has commissioned galleries to honour those who served in the Great War.
Those who served in the Second World War.
And now it is time to honour those who have served abroad in our nation's uniform in the decades since.
To honour the more than 130,000 Australians who have served since 1945.
To honour the 1005 Australians, who served for us and who were not returned to us since 1945.
To honour the service they have rendered in nations as diverse as Korea, Malaysia, Borneo, Vietnam, the first Gulf War; and now the second; Afghanistan; East Timor, Somalia, the Sudan, the Solomons and beyond.
And so our engagement continues.
It says something about the nature of Australia itself.
That we as a people are not only serious about the defence of the liberty of our own nation.
As a people, we are also mindful of the liberty of other nations.
Acting where necessary in partnership with our friends, our allies and the great community of nations in the affairs of the world.
It is not (and never has been) in the nature of Australians to be indifferent to the plight of others.
As a people, we are, by instinct, internationalist.
I congratulate the staff of the War Memorial for the excellence of their work.
I have visited many such memorials around the world.
I believe this memorial to be the best in the world.
And so it should be.
Because our first duty is to honour our men and women in uniform and to honour their contribution to our great nation.


The Government was elected 100 days ago with a mandate to build a modern Australia to meet the challenges of the future  -  to secure the future for the nation and for working families.
The foundation stone of this project is to prosecute a program of responsible economic management while building a modern Australian economy capable of dealing with the diverse challenges of the 21st century.
And always to do so fully mindful of the financial pressures facing Australian working families.
After three months in office, implementation of that program is underway.
We are acting on the immediate challenges.
We are preparing for the longer term.
And we are doing so in the face of economic challenges of a complexity that Australia has not seen in recent economic history.
Right now, we face conflicting economic currents:
     * Internationally, downward revisions of global economic growth from the United States to Europe and to some extent, Japan; and
     * At home, the serious threat of rising inflation.
And these cross-currents of international and domestic factors create significant and long-term challenges for our future economic policy settings.
Economic inheritance
The previous government would have the nation believe their economic policy performance was first class.
But as more and more data rolls in, a different reality emerges.
Consider the following five economic facts.
Fact one: When our government was elected, inflation was running at a 16-year high - and is now projected by the RBA to remain high until 2010.
Fact two: When our government was elected, interest rates had risen ten times in a row and were the second highest in the developed world.
Fact three: Productivity growth (a key factor in sustaining economic growth and keeping inflation low) is running at its lowest level in 15 years  -  having fallen from 3.3 per cent in the mid-1990s to 1.1 per cent in the current cycle.
Fact four: Since 2004-05 Commonwealth spending has grown on average at around 4 per cent per year in real terms  -  more rapid growth than in any another four year period in the past decade and a half.
Fact five: At the time of the election, despite the best terms of trade in 50 years, we had generated five and half years of monthly trade deficits  -  the longest sequence in Australia's recorded economic history, contributing to Australia's foreign debt tripling to a record $570 billion.
These facts are not political opinion  -  they are the cold, hard data produced by the ABS and the RBA.
And they are masked by the fact that the economy and the Budget have been awash with the cash produced by record global economic growth and a unique resources boom.
These, therefore, are the objective economic circumstances that the new government now confronts.
Inflation
By December 2007, underlying inflation had risen to 3.6 per cent on the Reserve Bank's preferred measure.
The Reserve Bank stated recently that it now expects inflation to remain above 3 per cent right through to June 2010, on both the underlying and CPI measures.
The previous Government had been warned on 20 separate occasions by the RBA about the increasing threat of inflationary pressures arising from supply constraints.
As the Reserve Bank noted in its monetary policy statement last month, “constraints on productive capacity have persisted for some time”.
Underlying inflation has been running at an average of 3%, the upper limit of the inflation target, for the past year and a half.
It did not arise overnight.
And it now puts into context the complacency of the previous Treasurer who state as late as mid 2007 that “inflation is right where we want it”.
Inflation is the enemy of business.
It is the enemy of working families.
And it is the enemy of the economy  -  because everybody is affected by the upwards pressure it places on interest rates.
Interest rates
We have already seen 11 consecutive increases to the RBA cash rate in the past six years, with three of them occurring since the middle of 2007.
Australians are paying the second highest mortgage interest rates in the developed world.
And all this from a government which promised before the 2004 election that it would keep interest rates at record lows.
Mortgage interest rates have now risen seven times since that promise was made  -  adding $276 every month to the cost of an average new mortgage.
And today we have a housing affordability crisis affecting working families right across Australia.
Productivity growth
Rising inflation has been paralleled by declining productivity growth over the past decade.
Productivity growth averaged 3.3 per cent per annum in the five years to 1998-99.
It fell to 2.1 per cent in the five years to 2003-04.
And it has fallen further to just 1.1 per cent in the first three years of the current cycle up to 2006-07.
That is just one third of the rate of productivity growth that the previous Government inherited in 1996.
The fact is productivity growth delivers inflation-free economic growth.
But the slump in productivity growth in Australia has been a major factor contributing to rising inflationary pressures.
And one of the core reasons for declining productivity growth has been a failure to invest in human capital, technology and infrastructure - at the time when we have had unprecedented budgetary opportunities through the explosion of rising revenue proceeds from the resources boom.
Investment in Productive Capacity
Australia's terms of trade have risen 40 per cent in the past five years.
The Reserve Bank has estimated that this has added 8 per cent to our real national income, equivalent to $80 billion per year.
The Chief Economist of ANZ Bank, Saul Eslake, estimated last year that the mining boom will drive a $398 billion improvement to the Budget bottom line between 2002-03 and 2010-11.
Certainly, spending had been rising rapidly under the previous Government  -  some 4.5 per cent in real terms in the current financial year alone.
But as research produced for the Business Council by Access Economics noted last week, spending simply wasn't being directed to our economy's supply constraints.
The BCA reported that the windfall from the mining boom has, and I quote:
“masked a deterioration in the structural, or underlying, integrity of the federal Budget... 
Of the $87 billion per annum that economic prosperity has delivered as windfall revenue to Canberra since 2002, all but $2 billion has been spent on income tax cuts and new spending. As a result, the Budget is now at risk of a marked and quick deterioration if business conditions turn down."
(BCA Budget Submission 2008 - 09)
External accounts
At the same time, despite enjoying its best terms of trade in more than fifty years, Australia is now experiencing large imbalances on its external accounts, characterised by
     * Export growth over the last decade falling to half the rate experienced during the decade before;
     * A current account deficit reaching record levels and staying above 5 per cent since June 2003  -  its longest period at those levels on record;
     * And foreign debt reaching $570 billion, three times the level when the Howard Government had taken office.
The objective challenges we face on our external accounts have been masked by extraordinarily strong terms of trade.
And the truth is record terms of trade is not the product of good policy, but good fortune.
That's why we should be investing the proceeds of the boom into the future productive capacity of the economy.
Or as one American President has said “the time to fix the roof is while the sun is still shining”.
The 5 point plan to fight inflation
The Government's response to the immediate economic challenges we have inherited is a five point plan to address the inflationary pressures.
In January, I outlined the core elements of that plan:
     * fiscal restraint, with a budget surplus target of at least 1.5 per cent of GDP this year;
     * encouraging private savings;
     * tackling the chronic skills shortages;
     * providing national leadership to address infrastructure bottlenecks; and
     * introducing measures to boost workforce participation.
In our first three months, we have made some initial progress on this agenda.
My purpose today is to outline how the Government plans to advance this agenda in the three months leading up to the Budget in May  -  as well as outline further measures to respond to the housing affordability crisis facing working families.
On fiscal restraint, the Government's razor gang is working intensively ahead of the Budget on 13 May.
The Expenditure Review Committee and the Strategic Budget Committee of Cabinet have been examining spending plans line by line. We identified $10 billion worth of savings before the election. And a further $643 million was announced by Lindsay Tanner last month.
We have set a fiscal target to guide budget policy with a surplus of at least 1.5 per cent of GDP in 2008-09, provided growth prospects remain as currently anticipated.
This contrasts with the 1.1 per cent projected by the previous government as late as the Mid Year Economic Forecast released by the previous government in October.
This will include hard decisions which may result in considerable political pain  -  but it is the only responsible course of economic action.
Boosting public savings is important to fighting inflation.
But this must be accompanied by new measures to boost private savings as well.
To help build a culture of savings, the Government has already released proposals for its new low-tax First Home Savers Accounts.
These superannuation-style accounts aim to boost private savings by helping first home buyers save for their first home.
This Wednesday is the closing date for interested parties to make submissions on the implementation design of First Home Saver Accounts.
We will be finalising the implementation details of those accounts after reviewing those submissions.
This is a major innovation for Australia - the first time such measures have been embraced to encourage home savings by any Australian Government.
To fight inflation we must also deal with the skills crisis.
The Parliament will soon pass legislation to establish Skills Australia, the body that will lead an integrated response to the skills crisis.
The Government is committed to delivering an additional 450,000 training places over the next four years.
That will start with the provision of 20,000 new training places in areas of skills shortage from April 2008.
The Government has called for Expressions of Interest for the provision of these places to start next month.
We will be moving ahead with the core elements of the education revolution.
We have already begun an audit of schools' existing computer facilities as part of the implementation of our $1 billion program for computers in secondary schools.
Within the next month, we will be releasing guidelines for schools to apply for the provision of computers.
In coming weeks, secondary schools will also be invited to begin applying for their share of our $2.5 billion fund for the construction of trades training centres.
And during the next three months membership of the National Curriculum Board will be finalised.
The fourth element in our five point plan to tackle inflation is addressing infrastructure constraints by providing national leadership on infrastructure development.
We recently announced the first Chair of Infrastructure Australia.
Within the next three months the full membership of Infrastructure Australia will be finalised, and to our plan is to have enabling legislation to passed through Parliament.
Within the next three months, an Expert Panel will assess private sector proposals for building the National Broadband Network, and we hope to commence construction by the end of the year.
This is the first time in Australia's history that the national government will assume a national leadership role in planning for our long-term infrastructure requirements.
The fifth element of the five point inflation plan is to lift workforce participation.
This requires a range of targeted initiatives including tax reform and improved access to affordable childcare.
We have already introduced into Parliament the Bill for tax cuts that, according to Treasury modelling, will increase workforce participation by an estimated 65,000 over the medium term.
We will be progressing consultations with interested parties on the construction of 260 new long day care centres on school and community sites.
We will also be finalising a Bill to increase the Child Care Tax Rebate from 30 per cent to 50 per cent of out of pocket costs, covering up to $7,500 in expenses per year, from July 1.
These initiatives will all help, in the immediate term and in the longer term, to address supply constraints and inflationary pressures.
We are nevertheless realistic about time lags and we take note of the Reserve Bank's warning that we face an extended period of elevated inflation.
Housing affordability
The economic challenges for the nation are significant.
But so are the challenges for working families  -  and the challenges they face in balancing the family budget.
Across Australia, there is no greater source of financial stress for working families than housing.
Australia has a real problem with housing affordability.
It is no exaggeration to say that in early 2008, housing affordability is the worst it has been in living memory.
Consider these faces.
In 1996, the average home cost four times the average annual wage.
A decade later, the average home cost seven times the average annual wage.
That means that while living standards were improving, it was actually getting more difficult to buy a house.
Second, in the past decade, the size of the average first home buyer mortgage has more than doubled  -  from $104,000 to $231,000 at the end of last year.
Third, when you look at actual mortgage repayments required to buy a home, the picture is even starker.
In 1996, the mortgage repayments on an average loan soaked up 17.9 per cent of average household income.
By the end of 2007, mortgage repayments on an average loan soaked up 32.3 per cent of average household income.
That is an increase from around one in six dollars going on the mortgage to almost one in three dollars.
By this measure, housing affordability has almost halved.
These are not Government or Labor Party statistics.
This is data from the Housing Affordability Report published by the Commonwealth Bank and Housing Industry Association.
Also published in that report is the Housing Affordability Index.
It 1996 that index was over 170.
At the end of last year it had fallen to less than 100.
Again, this suggests that buying is roughly twice as hard as it was a decade ago.
Many factors have contributed to the deterioration in housing affordability  -  but fundamentally there are simply not enough houses being built to meet the demand for housing.
According to ABS and Treasury analysis, whereas in 2004, new housing completions were roughly the same as underlying demand, a significant gap has emerged in recent years.
By 2007, completions had fallen to under 150,000 new houses per year while underlying demand for new houses increased to over 180,000.
That is a gap of over 30,000.
Australia cannot address housing affordability without building more houses.
And as the housing industry has argued, we can't build more houses without more skilled workers to build them.
Under the previous Government skills shortages in many industries  -  but especially residential construction  -  were neglected.
According to the Housing Industry Association, we will need an additional 20,000 skilled tradespeople over the next three years alone if we are going to build the houses that we need.
The Australian Government is acutely mindful of this shortfall  -  hence the decision to bring forward 20,000 training places to next month and focus these places on the construction sector as one of four primary sectors.
The HIA is also calling for a special visa program to increase the number of migrants working in the residential construction sector. The Government will also now consider the HIA's proposal.
The Government recognises a role for skilled migration in addressing skills shortages, having recently expanded the skilled migration program.
The impacts of construction shortfalls stretch beyond the first home buyer market.
As has become clear in recent years, having more people locked out of home ownership means more people stuck in the rental trap.
This means a tighter rental market.
That means fewer places to rent and higher rents.
There is certainly plenty of anecdotal evidence about how Saturday morning rental property inspections are beginning to resemble auctions, with dozens of people competing for every decent property and some offering to pay well above the advertised rate or to pay rent well in advance.
The Real Estate Institute of Australia reports that rental vacancy rates have now slipped below 3 per cent in every capital city.
It is no wonder that average rents for three bedroom homes have now risen by 82 per cent since 1996.
Forecasters are saying that the problem will worsen. BIS Shrapnel has predicted that if the rental market continues on current trends, rents across Australia will increase by an average of 28.5 per cent between now and the end of this decade.
The impact of such large increases in rent is a real problem for working families.
This morning, the Cabinet met and received fresh evidence of the housing affordability problem from the Federal Minister for Housing, Tanya Plibersek.
It is research commissioned by the Government from the National Centre for Economic and Social Modelling  -  NATSEM and is an analysis of ‘housing stress'.
Households are considered to be in housing stress when they pay more than 30 per cent of their gross  -  that is before tax  -  income on housing costs such as rent and mortgage repayments.
This new research looks at the impact of housing stress on low and middle income earners  -  that is, households whose incomes are in the bottom 40 per cent of households.
This analysis for the first time debunks the notion that housing affordability data is skewed because of the investments of high income earners.
It shows that middle and low income households are experiencing considerable housing stress  -  and the problem is growing over time.
Specifically, it looks at developments since 2004.
The research shows that there are now 1.1 million low to middle income households spending more than 30 per cent of their income on housing.
That has increased by a quarter  -  or 220,000 households since 2004. This is a stunning statistic. And it is a disturbing statistic.
And the data shows it is a problem affecting all generations:
     * The number of low and middle income families and singles in housing stress that are headed by a person under 29 years old has increased to 350,000 - an estimated 55 per cent increase since 2004.
     * The number of families with children in housing stress has more than doubled since 2004. There are now an estimated 575,000 low and middle income families with children in housing stress  -  around 300,000 more than in 2004.
     * The number of older Australians in housing stress has doubled since 2004. There are now an estimated 112,000 low and middle income families and singles headed by a person aged over 70 years old that are in housing stress  -  compared to around 56,000 in 2004.
When you look at this data, it is clear that the housing affordability problem has been one that has emerged over time and is now at a critical point.
It's why we committed to a comprehensive plan of action that will be spearheaded by Tanya Plibersek, the first Commonwealth Housing Minister that Australia has had for twelve years.
We made four key policy commitments on housing affordability last year: First Home Saver Accounts, a Housing Affordability Fund, encouraging greater private sector provision of affordable rental properties and revamping the Commonwealth Properties Disposal Policy.
And last month, we outlined measures to help families get the best deal on their mortgage and to improve competitive pressures in retail banking by making it easier for customers to switch banks.
Today I have already made reference to our First Home Saver Accounts.
I now want to make two announcements on the provision of affordable rental properties and our Housing Affordability Fund.
National Rental Affordability Scheme
The Government has begun the implementation of our election commitment to create more affordable rental properties around Australia by encouraging private investment, especially from institutional investors who play very little role in the provision of rental stock.
The Government's will establish a National Rental Affordability Scheme under which the Commonwealth will provide private investors with tax credits of $6,000 per year for ten years, for building new properties that are rented out at 20 per cent below the prevailing market rate.
The scheme will be implemented in partnership with the State and Territory Governments.
The Government's initiative begins with encouraging the construction of 3,500 affordable rental properties in 2008-09 and add to the stock to reach 50,000 within five years.
Improving housing affordability, however, is a long term challenge for this country.
We do this because improving housing affordability is a long term challenge for this country.
Australia had a national annual housing deficit of 30,000 homes in 2007.
And, despite a forecast increase in residential construction in coming years, we will still leave the backlog of unmet demand from previous years.
Even by 2011, the deficiency will exceed 50,000 houses in NSW alone, according to BIS Shrapnel.
Nationally, it could be three times that figure.
That will mean that we will have to continue to expand the stock of affordable rental properties beyond 2011.
Today I am pleased to further announce that the Government intends for this to be a continuing program  -  beyond the five year time period announced during the election.
Depending on specific details relating to its success rate, and subject to market conditions, the Government envisages that this extension would double the target of new affordable rental properties from 50,000 to 100,000.
On current trends, with demand continuing to exceed supply, we will also need to calibrate the future issuing of tax credits to market demand.
That is exactly what the Government's Rental Scheme will do. The Government's incentive forms a new partnership with the private sector  -  a PPP in concept  -  to deliver on an important economic and social objective.
Since the election, the Government has been hard at work on the implementation of this initiative, including through the Council of Australian Governments.
Through this new partnership with the States and Territories, the States and Territories have indicated an in-principle agreement to participate in the National Rental Affordability Scheme.
The States and Territories will provide $2,000 per home either through cash payments or in kind.
The States and Territories have discussed a range of ways in which they can support this Scheme, including the provision of cut price land or concessions on stamp duty or other charges.
In some cases States may make direct cash contributions.
The National Rental Affordability Scheme will create an entirely new stream to our existing housing market.
The Government believes we can improve rental affordability which still produces good returns for investors.
While there is no short term solution to the housing affordability problem, we believe that over time we can make a real difference  -  to encourage people to save a deposit, to encourage more housing construction, and to encourage investors into the affordable rental market.
Housing Affordability Fund
In addition to the Rental Affordability Scheme, we are establishing a $500 million Housing Affordability Fund to help drive housing construction activity.
The Fund will be used to address two components of house costs: infrastructure charges and levies and ‘holding costs' caused by planning delays.
The Property Council of Australia estimates that housing linked infrastructure charges can add up to $68,000 on a new home in some parts of suburban Australia.
Those charges pay for all sorts of important infrastructure like water, sewerage, transport, and parklands.
But when these charges they are passed on to the homebuyer, it can push the dream of owning a new home out of reach.
The Housing Affordability Fund will form a partnership between the Commonwealth and local governments  -  to invest in this infrastructure to reduce the cost of new homes.
Another part of the equation is ‘holding costs'  -  costs associated with planning and approval delays such as interest, land taxes, council rates and staff costs.
These too can add tens of thousands to the cost of a home.
Our partnership with local government will also address the need to streamline planning and approvals processes - to help reduce the cost of homes.
Last year, the Property Council identified this as priority number one for dealing with housing affordability.
Today I am pleased to announce that as part of our Housing Affordability Fund, the Government will invest up to $30 million in a new system to address planning delays.
The use of Electronic Development Applications and an On-Line Tracking Service will allow home buyers to check the status of their approval at any time of the day.
The system will also reduce confusion about the causes of delays  -  such as whether the household has made mistakes in their submissions, or whether the consultant, local government or state government is taking too long.
It will save local councils time and money.
And ultimately it will help reduce development costs and improve housing affordability.
This system is already operational in some councils and the Government investment I announce today will see it rolled out across the country.
We will begin with fast growing regions and roll out the system nationwide by the end of next year.
Today I have focused the economic challenge, the inflation challenge and the challenge of housing affordability on working families.
Of course there are many other elements in our election mandate  -  including the withdrawal of our combat troops from Iraq, ratifying Kyoto and closing the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australia.
     * Since the Government came to office, I have visited Baghdad and have spoken with the Iraqi Prime Minister and the US military command on the ground. We have negotiated the withdrawal arrangements for those combat forces, and that will be concluded in the middle of the year as we said.
     * We signed the instruments of ratification for the Kyoto Protocol upon coming to office. As a result, Australia was able to play a significant role at the United Nations climate change conference in Bali.
     * On February 13th the national parliament offered an apology to the Stolen Generations. We are now endeavouring to establish a new bipartisanship on the crucial challenge of remote indigenous housing, as part of our commitment to close the gap on infant mortality, educational achievement and life expectancy for indigenous Australians.
The hard work lies ahead  -  framing the Budget; designing an emissions trading regime; implementing major industrial relations changes; further education reforms; reforming the health care system; closing the gap for indigenous Australians; and the entirety of the COAG agenda, including business deregulation.
In the time since the Government came to office, I have learnt that the challenges Australia faces are as deep as we anticipated.
But I have seen also that the determination of the Australian people to confront these challenges is deeper than we could have ever thought  -  looking beyond the short-term to the long-term.
Yes, we have inherited some complex problems that have built up over many years.
But we are committed to dealing with those challenges  -  not avoiding them.
And we will not lose sight of why we've been entrusted with the great responsibility of public office  -  to seize the opportunity (not to squander it) to build a modern Australia to tackle the challenges of the future and to secure the future for working families.


I begin by honouring the traditional owners of the land on which this conference is held, the Ngunnawal people. And Matilda, thank you for the welcome.
Thank you for the invitation today to discuss the Government's agenda for the future of Australian agriculture.
I believe Australia's agricultural sector will play a critical role in our economic future  -  as a force that generates prosperity, productivity and export growth, and that can help to lead Australia's response to climate change and long term water shortages.
After several difficult years, the prospects for parts of the farm sector are looking up.
But the long term challenges to farming communities are very substantial.
The Government does not take the view that the outlook for agriculture is a continually declining share of the national economy.
The Government sees the agricultural sector as part of the 21 st century economy - not a relic of the 19 th century.
We see agriculture playing an important role in our nation's mainstream economic policies to build a modern Australia, ready for the challenges of the 21 st century.
We don't see it as a sector whose interests should be left to be managed by the National Party as if it were some sort of feudal entitlement.
I am committed to governing for all Australians.
I am committed to ensuring that the Government builds a future for Australians in regional and rural communities.
That's why in our first three months in government, I've spent time talking to farmers in places like Dalby, Walgett and Kyogle as well as talking to representatives of the farming community.
I have a personal and long standing interest in Australian agriculture, having grown up on a farm in rural Queensland.
Rural Australia has been an important part of my life.
I feel at home in rural Australia.
I feel welcome there.
As do my cabinet colleagues.
For these reasons, because the bush is so much a part of Australia's life  -  and because of the sheer economic significance of agriculture to the economic life of the nation  -  the sector you represent commands the respect of government.
Today I want to address the Government's response to three core challenges facing Australian agriculture.
     * First, the immediate challenges in the Australian macroeconomic environment from inflationary pressures;
     * Second, the longer term challenge of lifting our competitiveness in global markets and finding new export markets, and
     * Third, possibly the greatest long term challenge of all, dealing climate change and water shortages.
If we deal with those challenges, the real potential for Australian agriculture can be realised.
Challenges in Australia's macroeconomic outlook
The immediate challenge that we are facing comes from the uncertainty in the current macroeconomic outlook, reflecting a rising inflation threat in Australia against the backdrop of a slowdown in the United States and broader global economic uncertainty.
For Australian agriculture, the latest seasonal developments and commodity price movements have improved the sector's outlook, as the ABARE forecasts for 2008-09 released today show.
But the sector remains exposed to the impact of rising inflationary pressures.
Australia's rising inflation pressures has created an environment in which economic management has become a great deal more difficult.
Inflation is the enemy of agricultural producers as much as it is of Australia's working families.
The higher input costs being experienced by agricultural producers reflect an economy-wide problem in Australia, with the underlying rate of inflation now at a 16-year high of 3.6 per cent.
The deteriorating inflation outlook reflects capacity constraints across the economy that have been emerging for many years.
Those constraints have affected agriculture more than many sectors because of its reliance on infrastructure and its greater shortage of skilled workers.
These rising inflationary pressures have prompted to Reserve Bank to take aggressive action against inflation, with further consequences for the agricultural sector.
We have already seen 11 consecutive increases in the cash rate in the past six years, and the agricultural sector is hit especially hard by rising interest rates.
Combined with the high value of the Australian dollar, which has made exporters less competitive, the macroeconomic environment for many agricultural producers is very challenging.
The Government recognises the threat of high inflation and has begun implementing a five point plan to combat the immediate and longer term inflation threat :
     * Exercising fiscal restraint, with a tough approach to public spending and a budget surplus target of at least 1.5 per cent of GDP this year;
     * Building a culture of private saving with initiatives such as our new superannuation-style, low tax First Home Saver Accounts;
     * Tackling the chronic skills shortages with 450,000 extra training places and a plan for an education revolution;
     * Providing national leadership through Infrastructure Australia to address infrastructure bottlenecks; and
     * Introducing measures to boost workforce participation including expanding the provision of quality affordable childcare and lifting the childcare tax rebate from 30 to 50 per cent.
The implementation of the five point plan will be stepped up in the months ahead.
Challenges in global markets
The second major challenge to Australian agriculture is the longer term challenge to lift productivity and competitiveness, and strengthen its performance in global markets.
Global markets present us with challenges such as persistent trade barriers, but they also present us with substantial opportunities.
The strong global economic growth in recent years, particularly in emerging economies, has increased world demand for food, driven up commodity prices and expanded high value markets.
Income growth in emerging economies, and the burgeoning middle class in nations like China and India, are changing global agrifood markets and creating tremendous new market opportunities for Australian agriculture.
Even so, these are intensely competitive markets and we will need to work hard to succeed in them.
The recent improvements in the outlook for Australian agriculture partly reflect the impact that increased global food demand has already had on commodity prices.
Farm commodity export earnings are forecast to reach $31.4 billion in 2008-09 - an 18 per cent increase from the $26.7 billion forecast for 2007-08.
The gross value of farm production is forecast to increase by 18 per cent to around $46.7 billion in 2008-09 after an increase of nearly 14 per cent in 2007-08.
This is good news, but it is important to put it into the broader context of our relatively disappointing performance on global markets in recent years.
In the seven years since September 2000, export volumes have grown at an average annual rate of 1.8 per cent. This compares to average growth of 7.7 per cent over the preceding seven years.
In the period 1983-1996, net exports made a positive contribution to economic growth in 10 of those 13 years.
Since 1996, net exports have made a positive contribution to growth in only two of the subsequent years.
Australia has now recorded 69 consecutive months of goods and services trade deficits.
This is the longest series of trade deficits on record.
Our current account deficit has stayed above 5 per cent of GDP for longer than ever before, and we have inherited a foreign debt of $570 billion, three times the level that the Liberal Government inherited from Labor in 1996.
The long term challenge we face is to return to the strong export growth of the ‘80s and ‘90s and to improve our external balance.
That challenge is even greater when we consider how much the strong terms of trade in recent years has masked our weak export performance.
But with the right investment in knowledge, innovation, modern infrastructure and productivity, Australian agriculture can succeed in global markets and win  -  including in highly value-added agricultural markets.
There are lessons in the previous successes of Australia's primary industries for the whole economy  -  in particular, lessons concerning the importance of productivity growth, innovation and the development and application of research-driven knowledge, as well as achieving export market access.
Improving productivity and success in global markets
The question for the Government that I lead is how we help generate a new wave of productivity growth in the agricultural sector so that we can successfully meet the challenge in global markets.
That requires investment in skills; infrastructure; investment in research, development and innovation; investment to improve water use efficiency; investment in climate change adaptation measures, reducing emissions and a more efficient regulatory and compliance regime at both a state and federal level.
This is the long term economic agenda that we are implementing, and the agricultural sector will be a significant beneficiary of it.
The Government has already begun tackling Australia's infrastructure and skills deficits.
We know that infrastructure bottlenecks are a drag on productivity, especially for the agriculture sector, which relies heavily on transport, water and communications infrastructure.
The government has established Infrastructure Australia to bring national leadership to infrastructure development for the first time since Federation.
In its first 12 months, Infrastructure Australia will audit the nation's infrastructure and produce an Infrastructure Priority List to guide public and private investment.
We recognise that broadband is an immediate infrastructure priority for rural and regional Australia and we will soon be establishing the Expert Panel to advise on the next steps towards building a high-speed National Broadband Network.
A second critical part of our productivity agenda is to tackle the skills crisis and create an education revolution in Australia.
If Australia is to enjoy sustained growth and compete successfully in the global economy, we need to invest in human capital.
Under the Skilling Australia for the Future package, the government is allocating $1.2 billion over the next four years to fund an additional 450,000 training places, including 65,000 apprenticeships.
Legislation currently in Parliament will establish Skills Australia  -  a high level board of experts to advise on current and future demand for skills and training across all sectors including agriculture.
In relation to the agricultural sector, Skills Australia will be provided with industry intelligence by the Agri-Food Industry Skills Council, which will also be working more closely with the vocational education sector to deliver industry training needs.
The Government is also committed to fostering a culture of innovation. Innovation is critical to the competitiveness of agricultural producers in both global and domestic markets.
Our research and development focus needs to emphasise how producers do business beyond the farm gate, as much as innovation in farm production.
In particular we should focus on where innovation is most relevant to global trade and investment markets.
The Government announced a review of Australia's national innovation system in January.
The review is designed to finds ways for industry to better access new ideas and new technologies and the bridge the divide between industry and research.
Its results will be an important input to the development of the Government's policy approach to bolstering the capacity of the agriculture and agrifood sector to compete in the global economy.
Trade policy is of course another important part of the challenges we face in improving our global export performance.
The agricultural sector is perhaps more affected by changing global markets and by trade barriers than any other part of the Australian economy.
It therefore relies on the Government to achieve the best possible outcomes on market access, whether through multilateral, regional or bilateral agreements.
We are committed to using all options to expand opportunities for Australian exporters.
However Australia is above all committed to the liberalisation of world agricultural markets through the Doha round of negotiations in the WTO.
As Chair of the Cairns Group, Australia is doing all it can to reach out to other groups in the WTO to achieve progress.
The WTO Doha round negotiations offer the prospect of the largest gains, across the largest number of sectors and for the greatest number of economies
But in the meantime we will continue to work hard on regional and bilateral initiatives that can deliver genuine progress in improving market access.
In February, the Trade Minister, Simon Crean, also announced a comprehensive review of export policies and programs.
The review will look at how we formulate export policy settings to ensure that our policy settings are effective in building long term international competitiveness.
The challenge of climate change and water shortages
Beyond the immediate challenges created by the current economic environment, the greatest long term challenge facing Australian agriculture is the impact of climate change - with rising temperatures, more frequent extreme weather events and less rainfall.
Climate change will substantially affect the long term productivity and profitability of the Australian agriculture and food sector.
It will change water availability and lead to more frequent droughts, floods and bushfires and alter the distribution of pests and weeds.
In December ABARE published an analysis of the impact of climate change on Australian agriculture. It highlighted serious impacts on agricultural production and exports, reaching the key conclusion and I quote:
“The economic impacts of climate change are projected to be considerable and unevenly distributed around the world, with developing countries suffering the most. Australia is also projected to be one of the most adversely affected developed regions given the importance of agriculture in its economy.” (ABARE, Commodities, December 2007, p672) 
ABARE's analysis estimated that a changing climate could reduce wheat, beef, dairy and sugar production by an estimated 9-10 per cent by 2030 and 13-19 per cent by 2050.
ABARE also found that exports of these key commodities are projected to decline by as much as 63 per cent by 2030 and as much as 79 per cent by 2050.
Climate modelling by the CSIRO and the Bureau of Meteorology has suggested rainfall in southern Australia could be reduced by up to 10 per cent by 2030 and 20 per cent by 2050.
This is why the Government regards our response to climate change as critical to the long term viability of Australia's agricultural sector.
Our response to climate change globally will require an economic transformation in coming decades.
We need to prepare for climate change, but we also need to be ready to seize new market opportunities that come with tackling climate change.
Because as well as difficult challenges, climate change will create opportunities for agricultural Australia.
Today I want to announce one opportunity that the Government will be investigating: soil carbon.
A few days after the Government was sworn into office last year, I visited Matt and Anna Ahern's cattlestud in Roma with Queensland Agforce President Peter Kenny and with Tony Burke, the Minister for Agriculture.
We discussed soil management practices on farms, and the scope for productivity improvements and reduced emissions from improving cropping practices.
Peter's plea to me was that if the Government wanted to do something about carbon emissions for agricultural Australia, we should focus on the soil.
I am hearing more and more about the possible potential of enhancing the carbon stored in our soils.
That is why today I am asking Tony Burke  -  as part of the our Australia's Farming Future initiative  -  to investigate how better soil management can be part of Australia's response to climate change.
I recognise that this is a complex area and there is a variety of view points.
I am told that there are significant challenges to measuring the emissions from different farming techniques and estimating the carbon stored in our soils.
Those obstacles may make it difficult for soil carbon to play a role in our response to climate change, but we must examine the options.
The truth is that, as in many aspects of climate change, we are only just beginning to look at soil carbon.
‘Low till' or ‘no till' soil management practices were first promoted for their environmental benefits through the previous Labor Government's Landcare program that began in the early 1990s.
More recently in Parliament, the Independent MP for New England Tony Windsor has been a champion of these practices for their water conservation benefits.
We now need to investigate how such practices might provide Australian agriculture with a role in new markets related to reducing carbon emissions.
Climate change also elevates the importance of tackling our long term water shortages.
Securing a sustainable water supply for all Australians is one of the most fundamental challenges facing the agricultural sector as climate change impacts deepen.
We have an immediate problem resulting from the worst drought in 100 years with the situation in the Murray Darling Basin remaining critical.
Despite good rainfall and the floods in the north, inflows into the Murray system are still well below average due to very dry catchments and relatively high temperatures over the last six months.
The two year period to November 2007 recorded the lowest ever inflow to the Murray River. Inflows during this period were 43 per cent lower than the previous record low, which occurred at the end of 1938.
The Commonwealth and the Basin states are working together to manage this situation.
But we also have a longer term challenge of water shortages.
Improving water use efficiency is fundamental to driving on-farm productivity.
The benefits of these measures are real.
Last year I visited in farm around 20 kilometres to the east of Dalby, called Werrina Downs.
This property, owned by Kim and Jan Bremner, is a great example of the returns from investment in water saving infrastructure.
The Bremners had invested in a lateral boom irrigation system. This simple but effective technology has produced water savings in the order of 30 percent when compared with flood irrigation.
Encouraging the uptake of new technologies and infrastructure will be critical to managing our water shortages.
We need to make better use of water in both rural and urban Australia by modernising irrigation infrastructure and supporting households to install water saving devices.
We are committed to providing more confidence to those investing in the water industry through secure water access entitlements, better registry arrangements, monitoring, reporting and accounting of water use, and improved public access to information.
The government will support healthy rivers and groundwater systems by purchasing water to give back to the environment.
We will set a sustainable cap on the amount of ground water and river water we can use in the Murray Darling Basin.
The Commonwealth, States and territories are working through the Council of Australian Governments to identify opportunities for national action to ensure long term sustainable water use across Australia.
The Minister for Climate Change and Water, Penny Wong, chaired the first meeting of the COAG Working Group on Climate Change and Water on 25 January. Another meeting is scheduled for later this week.
In addition to our national response to water shortages, we need to improve drought policy and climate change programs to help farmers prepare for climate change.
In recent years I have travelled widely in regional Australia, including in my role in the trade portfolio and later as leader of the Parliamentary Labor Party.
I have seen first hand the impact of the drought across many parts of the country.
Drought is cruel.
Its effects don't stop when the rains come.
The impact on individuals and communities that have been forced to question their own long term survival is lasting.
It is hard to shake the images of drought-ravaged land from your mind even when you are only in drought territory for a short time.
How much harder it has been for people in farming communities labouring on dry, arid land year after year.
We can only hope that the drought is breaking.
Of course the science of climate change tells us that the medium to longer term seasonal conditions for agriculture will continue to get tougher.
The Exceptional Circumstances drought policy, introduced by the Hawke Labor Government, has served farmers and rural communities well.
This policy is based on a model of a one-in-25 year drought and assumes rainfall will return to past seasonal conditions and does not factor in climate change.
This approach needs updating.
I have asked the Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, Tony Burke, to work with the farming community and state and territory governments to develop options to improve drought management.
Let me make it clear, though, that the government will not be walking away from farmers in difficulty.
The government wants to ensure, however, that any assistance provided improves the resilience of farmers and farm businesses for the future.
So that every time a farmer connects with the Government, he or she goes away better prepared for climate change.
The government will invest $130 million over four years in the Australia's Farming Future initiative to help primary industries prepare for the impacts of climate change.
The initiative comprises three elements:
     * The $15 million Climate Change and Productivity Research Program will boost research on how farmers can respond to climate change. For example, the program might fund research into on the ground measures such as water use efficiency, or work on using and applying climate modelling and seasonal forecasting.
     * The $60 million Climate Change Adaptation Partnerships Program will include measures such as workshops to improve farmer awareness and understanding of the impact of climate change on agriculture, and on-farm climate change adaptation strategies such as property management plans.
     * The $55 million Climate Change Adjustment Program will help farmers adjust to climate change by funding professional advice, financial management training and re-establishment grants.
Climate change also raises risks associated with threats to biosecurity.
As climate change accelerates, diseases and pests will thrive in new areas.
Australia has been able to keep out many of the exotic pests and diseases that have devastating effects elsewhere in the world.
However, with ever-greater movements of goods and people, the risk of pests, weeds and disease entering Australia is increasing constantly.
We have seen the re-emergence of foot and mouth disease in the United Kingdom and the emergence of Avian Influenza in Asia, Europe and Africa.
More recently, Australia's horse owners and horse-related industries have suffered the devastating consequences of an outbreak of equine influenza.
Our quarantine and biosecurity arrangements must adapt to these evolving risks.
To this end, the government has announced a broad-ranging, independent review of Australia's quarantine and biosecurity arrangements.
This review will deliver on a key election commitment and will be the most wide-ranging and important review of our quarantine and biosecurity arrangements since the Nairn review was commissioned by the previous Labor government in 1995.
Our quarantine system also has a significant impact on the cost of doing business for both importers and exporters.
This review will also consider a range of issues including the effectiveness of import and export inspection and certification; and the scope and adequacy of the current quarantine arrangements as they affect business.
The challenges to the future of Australian agriculture are great, but we must not lose sight of the enormous opportunities for this sector given our natural competitive strengths.
To succeed in addressing those challenges, we need to draw out the best ideas for Australia's future from all parts of the community.
As you may be aware, on April 19 th and 20 th the Government will host the Australia 2020 Summit to help shape a long term strategy for the nation's future.
One of the ten core challenges being examined by the summit is future directions for rural industries and rural communities.
We want to hear new ideas about which rural industries are best positioned to take advantage of the global consumer markets of the 21st century. 
We are asking what options are possible for effective structural adjustment for rural industries and communities suffering the long term impact of climate change? 
And we are seeking view on what is the best way the Government can ensure the long term sustainability of rural and regional communities, including the fostering of the next generation of Australian farmers?
If you have thoughts on these or other issues relating to the future of agricultural Australia and rural communities, I invite you to make a submission through the Australia 2020 website.
In the meantime, I look forward to hearing of the ideas that emerge at this year's Outlook 2008 conference. I wish you the very best for today and tomorrow's proceedings.


It is a great pleasure to be back in Port Moresby again. It is always a pleasure to be among friends.
Thank you Prime Minister for your friendship, your hospitality and your time today.
I understand that this year marks the 40th anniversary of your entry into politics.  You have been an unrivalled figure in the politics of your country since before independence.  I would like to pay tribute to your contribution to your country, to relations between our two countries, and to the region we live in.
Mr Prime Minister, mine is a new government in Australia.
We were only elected a little over 100 days ago in Canberra.  They have been a busy first few months as we establish ourselves and set our policy directions.
We are seeking to chart a course for Australia that prepares us for the challenges of the 21st century   challenges that to a large extent our two nations share, though these challenges take a different shape in our respective nations. 
     * Addressing the complex challenges created by climate change;
     * Ensuring that we use the prosperity created by the mining boom to invest in our future;
     * Giving our children the best start in life through a quality education;
     * Reforming public services like health care. 
The Australian people have given us a mandate to build a modern economy and a modern society, a 21st century society, and our work is already well underway.
A key part of our plan is building a solid foundation of good relations with our neighbours and our other friends around the world.
Building our relationship with Papua New Guinea is an important part of that.  I am pleased that your Foreign Minister, Mr Abal, has already been to Australia for meetings with his counterpart. I was pleased that I, too, had the chance to meet him in Canberra.
The relationship that our two nations enjoy is unique. Australia's ties to Papua New Guinea are very special because of both what we share in the past and because of the shared challenges and opportunities that lie ahead of us.
Of course our historical ties are strong.
But the ties that we enjoy today are even more important to our relationship   ties that exist at the levels of government, education, business, tourism and culture.
Our government officials work together.
Our businesses have strong investment and trade links.
We have academics and students at each other's educational institutions.
We both attract tourists from each other's nation.
And our cultural and sporting links are strong.
Certainly, the enthusiasm for a State of Origin match in Port Moresby matches anything you will find in Brisbane or Sydney.
Players like Marcus Bai in rugby league, and Mal Michael in AFL, have been ambassadors for their nation in Australia.
If I can digress for a moment, I am pleased to have discovered a special local connection to Mal as in his teenage years he played for the Morningside AFL team in my own electorate in Brisbane.
Those people-to-people connections are critically important to our relationship.
Each person   each contact   each journey   helps to build the links between us.  Each one is a strand that joins us together.
Looking ahead, our two nations also share many opportunities and challenges.
We both face significant long-term challenges in ensuring growth and economic development in our own countries and across the region.
Our nations are both blessed with rich mineral resources, and we both face the challenge of working to ensure that the benefits of the global mining boom are used to build long-term prosperity.
Our nations both benefit from being open to foreign investment.
As we look to the future, we have the opportunity now to join together and write a new page in the history of our region   as we work together to foster stability, friendship, growth and prosperity in our region.
But we will only achieve that future if we make the decision to work together.
Mr Prime Minister, I believe that today you and I have made that decision.  We have agreed to work on a new partnership.
Our decision to build a new partnership is based on the idea that we both face many challenges.  How do we educate our people to make the most of the opportunities of the globalised world?  How do we ensure long-term economic development?  How do we meet the great global challenges like climate change?
Our decision is also based on the idea that we can meet these changes more effectively if we work together.
That means our governments working together; our ministers working together; our officials working together.
It also means us being able to pick up the phone and talk to each other directly when there's important business to be done.
Sometimes people want to focus too much on the problems and disagreements that exist in the relationships between countries. We both know that our relationship has complexities.
But the ties between our nations are much greater than those complexities. We have an enduring friendship. And after today, we have the basis for a new partnership.
Our discussions today have been very constructive   both for our bilateral relationship and for the region.  We had a very useful discussion about where we are headed and what we want to achieve.  As long as we agree on that, and we decide to get down to work, we can build a better relationship.
We discussed the idea of new partnership agreements   what I call  Pacific Partnerships for Development .
I was pleased that we could agree on this approach.  The important point is these Pacific Partnerships for Development will be about shared goals for Australia and our Pacific neighbours.  And it will be a symbol of our mutual commitment to each other.
We have already made a start by agreeing today on some important specific areas for cooperation.
I am particularly pleased that we agreed today on a new package of climate change measures.
No global challenge if more important.  No challenge demands more creative and cooperative responses than climate change.
We signed a joint statement today on climate change cooperation.  The statement noted three areas for cooperation: policy dialogue; forest carbon monitoring and measurement; and participation in global carbon markets.
We both have a lot to gain from cooperating in these fields.  We can draw on each other's experience, and we can show the world that countries with very different economic structures can find common ground on climate change.
I am also pleased that we discussed the Kokoda Track.  The Track is a great symbol of cooperation between us and it holds a unique place in our history. It is also a place of deep significance for many Australians who are the children or grandchildren of soldiers who walked the Kokoda Track.
Because of the Kokoda Track, many Australians are now discovering Papua New Guinea for the first time.
Mr Prime Minister I am also pleased to say that during my visit to Papua New Guinea, I will not just be seeing Port Moresby.
Visitors to Papua New Guinea are often urged to go see the country.  To go beyond Port Moresby and to meet the people.  But few do.  I'm pleased to say that on this, my first visit to Papua New Guinea as Prime Minister of Australia, I'll be going to Goroka tomorrow.
I understand that the Highlands Highway passes through Goroka.  I'm told it is the economic backbone of the country and its maintenance is critical for economic development and for access to key services such as health and education.
I'm very much looking forward to seeing that for myself.  And to seeing first hand a very beautiful and vibrant part of this great country.
Regional Affairs
Mr Prime Minister one reason I wanted to come to Port Moresby early in my term was to talk to you and members of your government about our region   the Pacific.
The Pacific countries are a diverse group.  There are the smaller island nations.  There is Australia and New Zealand.  And then there is Papua New Guinea.
Your country is unique.  It is a Pacific power and it sits at an important cross-road.
To your west is the world's largest Islamic democracy.  To your north the rapidly developing countries of East Asia.  And to your South Australia the world's sixth-largest country by landmass.
With these neighbours, your country has a great stake in regional affairs.
And perhaps your most important role is looking to your east, where the smaller Pacific countries lie.
As a leader in the region, Papua New Guinea is uniquely placed to help the island countries of the Pacific meet the challenges ahead.  And I look forward to working with you on those challenges.
Today, for instance, we discussed recent developments in Solomon Islands.  We are both committed to seeing stability in that country.  I appreciate your ongoing support for the Regional Assistance Mission to Solomon Islands.
We also discussed Fiji.  As prime ministers of two democracies, we understand the importance of protecting our institutions   political, legal and social.  Without our institutions, there is no certainty for the people.  And without certainty there can be no future.
Mr Prime Minister I would like to think of today as the start of a new phase in the relationship between our two countries.
I hope that new phase will be characterised by cooperation, respect and partnership.
I hope, too, that this new phase will build even closer links between our people, our business communities and our governments.
And I hope that, in the future, our relationship will be recognised as a unique example of cooperation.


I want to thank the organisers for the invitation to speak at this event hosted by the PNG-Australia Business Council and the Business Council of PNG in Association with the PNG Australia Alumni Association.
Since 1980, the PNG-Australia Business Council has helped nurture trade and investment links between PNG and Australia. The Council plays a valuable role in supporting new businesspeople, making its members aware of new business opportunities, and providing advice to both governments on what we can do to make it easier for the business community.
We appreciate the cooperation of the PNG Business Council as the nation's premier business group. Thank you for your support for the relationship between Australia and Papua New Guinea.
I also want to thank the PNG Australia Alumni Association.
One of the strongest stands in the relationship between our countries  -  besides rugby league of course  -  is the people who have spent extended periods of time in both nations, like PNG students or officials in Australia. They return home with a deeper understanding of the culture, values and way things happen in each other's country. Their contribution to the relationship between our countries is invaluable.
On a related point, I do hope that all of you will have a chance to join in the Australia Week celebrations that will be hosted by the High Commission next week.
This might be my first visit to Papua New Guinea as Prime Minister, but it is not the first time I have been here.
I came here in April 2006 and walked the Kokoda Track.
Like many other Australians, walking the Kokoda Track gave me a deeper sense of the bonds between Australia and Papua New Guinea than I could have imagined. For an Australian, there's something spiritual about the place.
Our people formed strong bonds as we fought and struggled together in World War II.
There are bonds formed too as we worked together for the transition to independence in 1975, and through the early days of PNG's independence  -  right through to today.
Many of you know about this history  -  you have lived through, and you have contributed to it and helped to shape it.
Now is the time for us to look forward  -  to consider the future of our relationship and to commit to a new partnership that embraces the new challenges of the 21st century: economic development in a global economy now being transformed by the rise of China and India; climate change; regional stability and regional security.
The PNG Story
The future for Papua New Guinea in this globalised world should be bright.
Like Australia, Papua New Guinea has benefited from strong global demand for commodities in recent years.
GDP growth is projected to be over 6 per cent in 2008. It was over 5 per cent last year.
That means the PNG economy is now worth around USD 6 billion  -  that is an impressive figure in a region where many countries measure their GDP in the $100s of millions or less.
Debt levels have been brought down. The Government has kept the budget is in surplus and the current account is running a surplus.
This country is growing. And it is already the leader in the region  -  accounting for around three-quarters of the region's total population.
I am pleased to say that trade and investment between our two countries continues to grow.
Our merchandise trade was worth almost $4 billion last year and the balance trade balance is in PNG's favour.
And there are growing opportunities for investment particularly in the resources sector, building on the 4000 individual Australian businesses that trade with PNG each year.
But PNG also has some challenges ahead of it. Progress has been mixed against the United Nations Millennium Development Goals that set targets to reduce poverty, improve health and ensure universal primary education.
The New Australian Government
The new Australian Government was elected to office only 106 days ago.
We were elected on 24 November on a platform of taking responsibility for our nation's future.
To help Australia meet the great challenge of climate change  -  both for our environment and our economy.
To build a world class education system.
To improve our hospitals and health services.
To fundamentally reform the Australian Federation, by significantly reducing instances of cost shifting, blame shifting, duplication and waste.
To deliver a strong economy that delivers for working families.
During our first three months in office we have begun the project the Australian people elected us to fulfil.
That is to build a modern Australia capable of meeting our future challenges  -  both for the nation and for working families.
Front and centre on our agenda has been the economy.
Because we believe that disciplined and responsible economic management must be the core business of any government.
At the heart of our economic agenda has been fighting inflation  -  and keeping downward pressure on interest rates.
At the same time, we have also placed high priority on building long-term productivity growth. We see this as a responsible way of building a strong economy and putting downward pressure on inflation.
Investing in the long term drivers of productivity growth is an underlying factor in our desire to build a world class education system.
We've called it an education revolution  -  fundamental reform right across the spectrum of education in Australia  -  from early childhood education, to schools, tech colleges, universities and R &amp; D.
Our Government has begun work on implementing many of our education initiatives - whether it be trades training centres in our secondary schools, computers in schools for all year 9 to 12 students or the bringing forward of 20,000 skills training places - the ball is well and truly now rolling.
We have also placed high priority on developing the infrastructure needs of the country.
We have established Infrastructure Australia to conduct an immediate audit of the capacity constraints which exist nationwide and we are committed to acting on the bottlenecks which create unnecessarily further inflationary pressures and hold back productivity growth.
On climate change our government has now ratified the Kyoto Protocol. This was our first act as a newly sworn in government.
Internationally, we are now a ready and willing participant in the process to negotiate an effective post-2012 agreement.
And on the home front, we are now working towards the establishment of an emissions trading system and a 20 per cent renewable energy target by 2020.
Our government's agenda is big and so is our appetite to see real and tangible outcomes  -  outcomes that help prepare Australia to meet its future challenges.
Pacific Partnerships for Development
One other key part of the new government's agenda is our foreign policy. I am determined for Australia to have good, strong relationships with the countries of the Pacific.
So, yesterday, I released the Port Moresby Declaration. This Declaration symbolises Australia's new approach to the region.
The core of the Declaration is that Australia will begin to negotiate Pacific Partnerships for Development with the nations of the Pacific.
These Partnerships will provide a new framework for Australia and the Pacific island nations to commit jointly to achieving shared goals.
Under the Pacific Partnerships for Development, the Government of Australia will be prepared to provide increased development assistance over time. We will do so in a spirit of mutual respect, mutual responsibility and mutual cooperation.
The Partnerships will embrace:
     * improving economic infrastructure and enhancing local employment possibilities through infrastructure and broad-based growth;
     * enhancing private sector development, including better access to microfinance;
     * achieving quality, universal basic education;
     * improving health outcomes through better access to basic health services; and
     * enhancing governance, including the role of civil society, and the role of non-government organisations in basic service delivery.
The goal of these Pacific Partnerships for Development is to assist the countries of the Pacific make real progress against the Millennium Development Goals.
I understand that these are long-term goals. But the target date for achieving the Millennium Development Goals is 2015, which is not that far away.
I look forward to Australia and Papua New Guinea working towards a Pacific Partnership for Development.
But we are already doing a lot together. Today I will visit Goroka. Because our Government recognises that there is more to Papua New Guinea than Port Moresby alone  -  this is big country with diverse cultures and diverse challenges.
One such challenge that I would like to address today is the spread of HIV/AIDs.
AusAID projections for Papua New Guinea on HIV/AIDS infection rates out to 2025 are alarming:
     * there are currently between 40,000 and 60,000 people with HIV/AIDS;
     * with a business a s usual response, this will result in half a million cases by 2025;
     * with a strengthened response, the result will be 350,000 cases; and
     * with a heightened response through education, prevention and management the result will be 220,000.
That's why today I am announcing that our Government will commit $13 million in programs towards assisting non-government organisations working right across Papua New Guinea with people affected by HIV/AIDS. NGOs working in this field who will receive support include Save the Children, Anglicare and World Vision.
One of the programs is funding for the Burnet Institute who work with Save the Children, Family Health International and World Vision. Their program seeks to reduce the risks of HIV/AIDS for the most vulnerable members of the community.
Because of the movement of our two peoples in and around the Torres Strait, Australia and PNG have a mutual interest in ensuring that this moves to the top of our bilateral cooperation agenda.
I can also announce today that Australia will increase overall aid funding to Papua New Guinea by up to $25 million in 2008-09. This funding will go to education, health and law and justice support and incentive based payments.
These new funds will be targeted at upgrading schools, doing more in the fight against malaria, and doing more to maintain and upgrade key roads.
Incentive based payments will offer the possibility of more funding once jointly agreed performance criteria are met. These funds could then be used by the Government of Papua New Guinea for further work in areas such as infrastructure.
This is one of the ideas at the heart of the Pacific Partnerships for Development I announced yesterday in the Port Moresby Declaration  -  mutual responsibility.
When you look at these announcements, you can see that we are already working towards the Millennium Development Goals  -  health, education and infrastructure are all key elements of our approach.
And, I am very pleased to announce today a series of programs to help develop sports in Papua New Guinea  -  particularly Rugby League.
This $260,000 package is targeted at enhancing facilities at sports grounds and providing equipment such as boots, jumpers and shorts.
We will provide $50,000 to help around 2000 young players meet the registration costs for playing football.
I am also pleased to announce that I have agreed to a request for the Australian Rugby League to use the title “Prime Minister's XIII” for a match against the PNG national team the Kumlus.
I want to give a real boost to sport in PNG. Helping provide young people with access to sporting facilities and organised sporting activities is a good way for us to send messages about fitness and good health among young people.
Carbon Forest Agreement
Yesterday Prime Minister Somare and I also discussed climate change.
In fact, we did more than just talk about it. We signed the Australia-PNG Forest Carbon Partnership.
It is about us taking action together on climate change. It is an example of us working together on the most important global issue we face.
Under the Forest Carbon Partnership, Australia and PNG recognise the importance of reducing emissions from rainforests as one key element in effective global action against climate change  -  emissions from deforestation constitute the second-largest source of global emissions after power stations.
With more than 29 million hectares of rainforest in PNG, it is one of the most important countries for this type of activity.
Under this new partnership we will discuss firstly how we can work together to establish sustainable forest management as an integral part of a future international climate change agreement.
Secondly, Australia will provide technical support to PNG in building a satellite based forest monitoring system and means for measuring carbon in forests. This will be an essential ingredient in positioning PNG to participate in future international carbon trading markets.
Thirdly, we will explore opportunities for practical projects to show how international carbon trading arrangements might work on the ground.
The Private Sector
Our Forest Carbon Partnership have a real connection to the business community.
For instance, our work on forest carbon has the potential to generate substantial investment flows into PNG. International businesses seeking to offset emissions increasingly will be looking for credible and verifiable emissions credits, including from forests.
We look forward to engaging with business as part of our cooperation with PNG on forest carbon.
The Pacific Partnerships for Development are also closely linked to business. Enhancing private sector development, including through better access to microfinance and helping build better infrastructure are key areas under the Partnerships  -  areas that are crucial for broad-based, sustainable economic growth.
The Australian Government is committed to a new partnership with Papua New Guinea. And we hope that the private sector can be a big part of that.
Global and Regional Partners
Just as Australia and Papua New Guinea can work more closely together bilaterally, we can also work together more on regional matters.
The Pacific Islands Forum is the most important of the region's institutions. Its annual leaders meetings set the political direction for the Pacific.
I am committed to enhancing our engagement with the Pacific Islands Forum. In the lead up to this year's leaders meeting in Niue in September I look forward to working with Sir Michael and other leaders in the region.
The region stands to gain a lot from closer integration  - particularly economic integration. We will be pursuing negotiations for a region-wide free trade agreement  -  the so called PACER Plus talks.
As the biggest trading Pacific island nation by far, PNG will be a key partners for us in the negotiations.
I understand the interest in the Pacific in labour mobility as a key part of economic integration. We are looking closely at this complex issue. We are following a New Zealand pilot program very closely and hope to discuss labour mobility at the Pacific Island Forum later this year.
Australia's cooperation with Papua New Guinea goes beyond these traditional areas. At the Bali Climate Change meeting in December, Prime Minister Somare, President Yudhoyono of Indonesia and I discussed climate change.
Cooperation between Australia, Indonesia and PNG has the potential to have a real impact on greenhouse gas emissions, particularly if we look at better forest management.
I believe that Australia and Papua New Guinea have begun a new era of cooperation.
I have no illusions that Australia and PNG will need to work hard  -  harder than we ever have  -  to move our relationship up a gear. But I'm also determined that we do so, and that we show the world how two diverse and different nations in the same region are capable of tackling contemporary challenges.
Ladies and gentlemen ...
Our two great countries are linked together through history, through people and through a desire for a better future.
As leader of the Australian Government I will be doing what I can to strengthen those links.
But I also want to ask for your help  -  the Australians here in Papua New Guinea, the PNG business community, those of you who have studied in Australia, and those of you with links to Australia through links between church and other community groups. I want to ask you to join me in building a stronger relationship between us.
A new partnership that can be a model to the rest of the world.
A new partnership that gets results.
A new partnership that advances the interests of both our nations and our region.
A new partnership that has started today.
Thank you.


Women of Australia, one and all. Thank you Tanya and thank you Jenny. And as for the tie by the way, when you make any reference to my tie I always watch to see Therese flinch because it is usually not to do about the colour it is to whether I am wearing one that is stained or not.
It was in this Old Parliament House in 1943 that Australia elected its first women to Federal Parliament. Miss Dorothy Tangey was first elected as Senator and Enid Lyons was elected to the House of Representatives. And it was in this Old Parliament House that a Labor Prime Minister Gough Whitlam made history in 1973 by appointing Elizabeth Reid, adviser on matters relating to women which was the first such position in the world.
And this Old Parliament House was to be the place of another historic milestone a little over a decade later in 1984 when under the next Labor Prime Minister, Bob Hawke, Parliament passed the Sex Discrimination Act.
And I now, in the new Parliament House am proud to lead the first Federal Government to have a Deputy Prime Minister who is a woman.
I am proud to have four women in the Cabinet, seven women in the Ministry, the highest representation of women in any Federal Cabinet or Ministry.
I am proud of the fact that the Government I lead has within its senior ranks, Ministers and Parliamentary Secretaries of the calibre of Julia Gillard, of Jenny Macklin, Nicola Roxon, Penny Wong, Tanya Plibersek, Justine Elliot, Kate Ellis, Maxine McKew, Ursula Stevens, Jan McLucas.
I am proud of the fact that one in three Labor members of Parliament are women, the highest representation of women in any of the major parties.
I am proud that nearly half of our Labor Senators are women. I am proud of the Labor Party's recognition of the talents, ability and contribution of women.
In the Federal, State and Territory Parliaments across Australia, 37 per cent of all Labor representatives are women.
I am proud of the fact that our trade union movement today is led by a woman.
I am proud of the fact that in my home state of Queensland, Anna Bligh, an exceptionally capable individual who I have known for many years, is the Premier of that state.
I am proud of the fact that we are a Government of all the talents.
And I am proud of the fact that I am married to a woman who is independent, successful and definitely in her own right.
Our core organising principle as a Government is equality of opportunity. And advancing people and their opportunities in life, we are a Government which prides itself on being blind to gender, blind to economic background, blind to social background, blind to race, blind to sexuality.
We are proud of the fact that equality of opportunity means that all people, all people, all Australians, should have equal access to the opportunities which this great country provides.
We are committed to policies which recognise and advance the interests of Australian women. We are committed to improving the working conditions of women in particular through the abolition of WorkChoices and AWAs, which have unfairly penalised women.
We are committed to giving women more choice, in balancing work and family life. Parents with responsibility for children under school age would have the right to request flexible working arrangements. Employers will only be able to refuse a request on reasonable business grounds.
Each parent will be entitled to twelve months unpaid parental leave in connection with the birth of a child. This will ensure that families can have a parent provide continuous care for a child for up to 24 months after birth. And the Productivity Commission measures, which Jenny referred to before, are now on foot.
We are also committed to improving safety for women, and have introduced a national plan to reduce violence against women and children.
This Government, the Government that I lead, will embrace all necessary measures to reduce, and ultimately eliminate, any acceptable tolerance of violence against women, under any circumstances.
On an international front, we are also active in advancing the welfare of women in developing nations through the UN millennium development goals. These are important goals which go to the lives and livelihoods of women across the world, across the developing world.
We also want to progress the protection of women from sexual slavery and human trafficking.
These are just some of the policy initiatives the Government is implementing. The contribution of women, both to our Parliament and to the broader Australian community, I believe, should be celebrated.
And as I look into the faces of the young women here today, from various schools across Canberra, and like Jenny, I have encountered many across the many schools across the nation, it makes me enormously optimistic about the nation's future, when I see so many talented, ambitious, broad hearted, clear minded young women wishing passionately to make a contribution to this nation's future.
You do our hearts proud every time we engage you across the nation. And we encourage you in taking on the challenges of the nation.
I welcome the leadership of all those women who are here in so many ways and so many places and so many different times, because you have made a contribution to making this country a better place with a greater and more effective participation in the affairs of the nation. I congratulate you for it.
And I thank you very much for this opportunity to be among you today to celebrate the role of women in our life, our national life, today in Australia, and to advance further the opportunities of women in the period ahead.


The Australian Government's mission is to implement a reform agenda to build a modern Australia capable of meeting the challenges of the 21st century  -  to secure both the nation's long-term future, and a future for working families.
During its first three months, the Government has focussed primarily on the implementation of its domestic policy agenda. Now, given the uncertainty in global financial markets and the increasing challenges facing the global economy, the Government will use the period ahead to engage critical economic decision makers and business leaders abroad.
To advocate the strength of Australia's economic credentials. As well as continuing to engage our economic partners in the US, Europe and China on the best global response to the current crisis. The Government, through the RBA, the Treasury and APRA has been actively engaged in monitoring the impact of this crisis since the Government's election in November. This is because the Government believes the maintenance of global economic and financial stability is fundamental to Australia's future and therefore should command the full resources of government as a first priority.
Future Challenges for Australia
Beyond the immediate and important challenges facing the global economy, Australia faces a range of additional challenges that are as formidable as they are fluid. These include:
     * inflation at its highest level in 16 years;
     * the second highest interest rates among advanced economies;
     * productivity growth that has been in decline throughout this decade;
     * rising cost of living pressures for working families across the board, including the pressures faced by the poorest Australians;
     * global demographic change, including the ageing of Australia's own population and workforce;
     * economic and environmental pressures arising from global climate change;
     * the continuing threat of global and regional terrorism and the spread of weapons of mass destruction;
     * the security, economic and environmental challenges of our immediate island neighbours in the Pacific, and
     * the adequacy of our existing global and regional economic and security architecture to deal with the challenges of the future.
Not only are the policy challenges the nation now faces formidable, the policy environment in which the nation must now operate is increasingly complex and interconnected. There is no longer a clear distinction between that which was once clinically defined as “foreign” as opposed to “domestic”; “internal” as opposed to “external”; “national” as opposed to “international”; “global” as opposed to “local”.
What we have witnessed in the post-World War II, post-Cold War, post-ideological age of the late 20th century, and now the increasingly digital world of the 21st century, is the progressive globalisation of the security and economic policy domains of the future.
Acting nationally now requires acting internationally
The challenge this presents to Australian policy makers of the future is acute. Australia today lives in an increasingly joined-up world. If Australia fails to engage with the global economic, security and environmental challenges, we will simultaneously fail to deal with their impact on our own country.
That means in order to advance Australia's interests at home, we must increasingly be engaged with other nations in responding to the challenges to those interests abroad. Foreign policy, foreign economic policy and national security policy must increasingly be seen as the natural expression and extension of the nation's domestic policy interests  -  not as some sort of policy exotica removed from the Australian mainstream, but as part and parcel of the interests of main-street Australia. Those who would still believe (or, for the purposes of crass partisan advantage, pretend to believe) in the splendid isolation of the Australian continent live in a fool's paradise.
For example:
     * a failure to engage with the global community on climate change would exclude us from the chance to shape the global response in ways consistent with our national interests;
     * a failure to act effectively on terrorism in our wider region affects our ability to act effectively on terrorism domestically, and
     * a failure to act on the development challenges of the South Pacific Island states will result long term in rolling Australian military interventions, together with the risk of a large-scale influx of refugees from the region.
Australia therefore has no option other than to be fully globally and regionally engaged if we are to effectively prosecute our national interests. The purpose of my remarks tonight, the first on foreign policy since the election of the new Government, is as follows:
     * to outline why the challenges Australia faces will require us to be more internationally active, not less;
     * second, to outline why this will require a new period of active, creative Australian middle-power diplomacy, and
     * third, to outline a range of economic policy considerations that will underpin my upcoming visit to the United States, Europe and China.
Australia acting in global and regional partnership
For Australian policymakers, this increasingly interconnected policy terrain underlines the importance of acting cooperatively with other states.
Australia's national assets are of course not insubstantial.
     * Of the 192 members of the United Nations, Australia has the sixteenth largest economy.
     * Australia has the fifth largest economy in East Asia.
     * Australia is a major supplier of energy and mineral resources to China, Japan and the Republic of Korea.
     * And, in purely military terms, the Australian Strategic Policy Institute this year ranked Australia's defence spending as the 11th largest in the world.
Nonetheless, to achieve the sort of global and regional outcomes that are consistent with our interests, we cannot simply rely on our national assets but instead must act in partnership with our allies, friends and the broader international community. Australia has a deep, abiding national interest in the furtherance of a robust, international rules-based order that underpins our long-term security, economic and environmental interests. To maximise those interests, our capacity to act effectively bilaterally, plurilaterally and multilaterally must continue to be enhanced.
Towards a Creative Middle Power Diplomacy
That is why the new Australian Government is committed to the principle of creative middle power diplomacy as the best means of enhancing Australia's national interests. It is also the best means of acting as effective international citizens in enhancing the global and regional order on which we all depend. That means operating in partnership with our long-standing ally the United States  -  as the Government argues that the US continues to be an overwhelming force for good in the world.
It means acting in partnership with our friends in the Asia Pacific region in organisations including APEC, the ASEAN Regional Forum and the East Asia Summit. It also means acting in partnership with the United Nations across the range of pan-global challenges from climate change, the Millennium Development Goals and the continuing challenge of nuclear weapons proliferation. In all these domains, Australia intends to prosecute an active, creative middle power diplomacy in partnership with the community of nations.
We believe this is the rational thing to do in pursuit of our own core economic and security interests. We also believe this is the right thing to do because Australia can be a greater force for good in the world. The truth is that Australia's voice has been too quiet for too long across the various councils of the world. That is why during the course of the next three years, the world will see an increasingly activist Australian international policy in areas where we believe we may be able to make a positive difference.
We have begun this process in the Government's first few months in office with our ratification of Kyoto and the active role we played at the Bali Conference on climate change. Also with our immediate response to the security crisis in East Timor.
And more recently with our new response to the acute development challenges facing the Pacific Island states through the Port Moresby Declaration  -  reinforced by our pre-election commitment to increase Australia's overseas development assistance to 0.5 per cent of GNI by 2015. That commitment will assist us in fulfilling our obligations towards the realisation of the Millennium Development Goals in our own immediate region. For the Australian Government, this is the beginning of Australia's renewed international engagement. There is much, much more to be done.
Australia's Global and Regional Economic Interests
The area which right now underlines starkly the absolute interconnectedness of Australia's national, regional and global interests is the impact on the global economy of recent instability in global financial markets. This global economic uncertainty has underlined the decision early in the Government's term to visit the United States, Europe and China  -  all critical to the shape of the global economy for the critical year ahead.
A primary reason for this visit is to communicate to the economic and business leadership of the US, the UK and China the continuing fundamental strength of the Australian economy in the face of international turbulence. I will meet with economic policymakers in Washington, New York, London, Brussels and Beijing. Decisions taken in these capitals will directly shape the global financial environment and impact on Australia's economic future. It is the Government's responsibility to influence international decision-makers as we prepare the Australian economy to the greatest extent possible for the turbulence ahead. That is why I will also be taking the opportunity to argue strongly Australia's economic case, the robustness of the Australian financial system and the strength of our corporate balance sheets in my meetings with international business leaders.
It is important for our interests that overseas observers understand the different economic conditions in Australia compared with other economies.
     * That Australia has a central bank with robust and enhanced independence.
     * That we have a strong regulatory framework for Australia's financial market.
     * That Australia has very low domestic exposure to sub-prime mortgage defaults.
     * That the balance sheets of our principal corporates are strong.
     * That resources demand (from China and India) is holding up strongly and well into the future.
     * That the Government continues to be committed to a conservative approach to budget policy.
     * That the Government has zero net public sector debt.
     * And that the Government is not complacent about the need to push ahead with further, long-term economic reform.
I remain an unapologetic optimist about Australia's long-term economic future despite the challenges that lie ahead.
The Global Financial Crisis
The current financial crisis represents the unwinding of the extraordinary global credit boom of the last several years. As with previous credit market cycles, the top of the cycle was characterised by a period of strong economic growth, low interest rates and rapid increases in asset prices (especially the housing market and share markets). These conditions created a financial boom in which credit became widely available and relatively cheap.
Advances in information technology and financial engineering allowed the development of sophisticated new financial instruments. Regulatory frameworks did not always keep up with the rapid pace of change. The risks inherent in these financial innovations were not always well understood by various ratings agencies and regulators.
Investors became overconfident and began to accept higher risks and lower returns  -  as reflected in the decline in corporate investment yields. In 2007 there was a sudden loss of confidence in the value of mortgage-backed securities when banks began to report large losses on mortgage backed assets.
This led banks to hold on to their cash reserves. Interbank spreads rose and interbank lending volumes fell. Banks were less willing to lend to each other because they feared that they would need the cash themselves, and they were worried about the risks in other banks.This has led to the significant tightening of credit markets that we have been witnessing.
Conditions in global financial markets remain difficult. There is continuing uncertainty about the size and distribution of losses from the sub-prime crisis. To date, banks have announced write downs totalling $195 billion. Equity markets have also fallen dramatically with several major bourses, including the ASX, having fallen more than 20 per cent from their peaks last year.
Credit markets remain tight with elevated spreads and securitisation markets are largely closed. There are concerns that the financial crisis and its flow on effects in the US housing market will cause a wider downturn in the US economy. The IMF expects the US economy to slow markedly in 2008 and to grow on average by just 0.8 per cent over the year.
Global growth is also expected to slow in 2008. The IMF expects global growth to slow from 4.9 per cent in 2007 to 4.1 per cent in 2008, with risks largely on the downside. In this uncertain environment, the Government is working with other governments and regulatory agencies on how we coordinate the most effective global response to these new challenges facing the international economy.
Engaging our global and regional economic partners
The economic challenges we face and the need for cooperative action in response highlight the importance of the Australian Government engaging closely with our economic partners around the world. The Australian Government is committed to pursuing our overriding interest in greater openness in global markets  -  rather than retreating towards protectionism in the face of global economic uncertainty.
For me this message is as relevant in Washington as it is in Brussels and Beijing.
The United States is the biggest economy in the world. It is the largest trading nation in the world. The US dollar dominates global financial transactions. For Australia, too, the United States is a crucial economic partner.
Our trade is robust  -  it was worth around AUD$47 billion last year, making the US our third-largest trading partner overall. The US also accounts for nearly 30 per cent of our incoming investment and for nearly 40 per cent of our outwards investment. The United States is more than a close economic partner. In many ways, it plays the most important role in sustaining global growth and sustaining the momentum underpinning open global markets.
US leadership is crucial to getting a good outcome on the Doha Round of trade negotiations. An outcome that delivers immediate market access gains will give a much-needed confidence boost to business with a signal that the governments of the world are committed to ongoing trade liberalisation. Of course the United States cannot achieve a result on its own.
It also requires European cooperation. That is why I will be raising these matters in Brussels as well as Washington. Australia and Europe have well known differences on agricultural policy. We also have very closely aligned interests on pushing to make it easier for services businesses to trade across international boundaries.
As the policy centre of a unified Europe, Brussels speaks for a trading group that is bigger than even the United States. And taken as a whole, the European Union is Australia's biggest trading partner. The United Kingdom is Australia's largest trading partner in the European Union and is second only to the United States as a source and destination of investment for Australia. London is now the world's largest financial centre. And in London I will argue that Australia remains a first class place to invest.
Australia's economic engagement spans the globe. But our trading interests are closest with the Asia-Pacific region. Over 70 per cent of our trade is with the member economies of APEC. Our top three merchandise export markets are Japan, China and the Republic of Korea. India is our fastest growing major export market. Our two-way trade with Indonesia, Malaysia and Singapore is worth over $40 billion.
For Australia, it is crucial that the Asia-Pacific region remains open to trade and investment. We need open, inclusive regional institutions. And we need to ensure that bilateral and regional free trade agreements support the rules-based trade system of the WTO. The region's economic importance to the world continues to grow. Japan is the world's second-largest economy with a GDP of around USD$4.5 trillion  -  and Japan remains Australia's largest export market. That's why Australia places great priority on the negotiation of a free trade agreement with Japan.
In Beijing I will be discussing our free trade agreement negotiations with China. Progress to date has been slow. It is a complex process to negotiate comprehensive improvements in market access with a country undergoing such rapid reform and development. I will be urging my Chinese counterparts to join with us in collectively redoubling our efforts on the negotiations to get a high quality outcome.
Australia's trade with China has already been the subject of many economic headlines  -  last year it became our largest merchandise trading partner, and over the last decade the value of our merchandise exports has grown by 20 per cent per year. And China's global importance continues to grow  -  it is already the world's third-largest trading nation and it has foreign exchange holdings in excess of USD$1.6 trillion.
In all the capitals I will visit, advancing Australia's economic interests will be at the top of the Government's agenda. But in an interconnected world, the economic agenda also has to be seen in the context of global politics and global strategic stability. That is why security policy, climate change, development assistance, humanitarian intervention and broader human rights will also feature prominently during this visit. Because on the economy, foreign policy and security policy, Australia is a nation with both regional and global interests which the Government is resolved to prosecute.
Four years ago at the national conference of the Australian Labor Party, I introduced an amendment to the party's foreign policy platform entrenching as the three pillars of our foreign policy: our alliance with the United States, our membership of the United Nations and our policy of comprehensive engagement with Asia.
That trilogy is very much reflected in the structure of this upcoming visit. We will work closely with our ally, the United States  -  the world's pre-eminent power.
We are committed to re-vitalising our engagement with the United Nations  -  and working more closely together in the UN with our partners around the world, including Europe. And we are committed to close engagement with the countries of Asia and the Pacific. It is our neighbourhood. And it is a natural focus for our foreign policy.
That is why the Government awaits with interest the views of this conference on the emerging stresses and strains of our region's existing institutional architecture.
Institutional reform is long overdue. But Australia will be moving cautiously on this score in close consultation with our partners in the region. Our common resolve must be to pursue both a peaceful and prosperous future for the Asia Pacific region.
And it is through this wider process of continuing regional and global engagement that the new Australian Government is now determined to make its contribution to the future development of a robust international rules-based order that enhances the security and economic wellbeing of us all.


The Australian Government is committed to implementing a new reform agenda for the nation to build a modern, competitive Australia capable of meeting the challenges of the 21st century. For the economy, that means developing policy frameworks to maximise Australia's global economic competitiveness in an increasingly competitive and, now increasingly unpredictable, world. That is why in large part I travel today to the United States, Europe and China  -  respectively the world's largest economy, the world's largest investor in Australia and Australia's largest merchandise trading partner. 
My objective is simple: to argue Australia's economic case in a number of the principal economic capitals of the world and to prepare Australia for the global economic uncertainties that lie ahead.
The Government is acutely conscious of the complex and in part conflicting economic challenges we have inherited:
inflation rates running at 16 year highs at home that have fuelled 12 interest rate increases in a row, and 
at the same time, substantial instability in global financial markets, resulting in downward revisions in global growth and prompting the US Federal Reserve to cut interest rates by 300 basis points in just six months. 
That is why in its first three months in office, there has been considerable and necessary emphasis on macro-economic stability.
In January, following the Government's first Cabinet meeting of the year, the Government released a five point strategy to tackle inflation. Throughout this time, the Government has also maintained close contact with Treasury, the RBA, ASIC and APRA on the fallout from the US sub-prime crisis in global financial markets and its implications for Australia.
What for parts of the Northern Hemisphere has been a winter of economic discontent has also presented considerable challenges for economic policy makers here during the Southern Hemisphere's summer. But beyond this important and immediate challenge of continuing macro-economic management, the purpose of my remarks today is to outline the Government's broader economic reform agenda for the decade ahead (notwithstanding the fact that of course our political fate rests entirely in the hands of the Australian people).
Australia has suffered for too long from short-termism. What the nation needs is a long-term economic reform program around which we can build a broad, long-term political consensus. That in part is why the Government next month is convening the Australia 2020 Summit. The economic stream of the Summit aims to harness new proposals on how to enhance Australia's global competitiveness - and to add these proposals, where appropriate, to the Government's overall policy reform agenda.
My remarks today therefore fall into three parts.
First, the state of global financial markets and their unfolding impact on the global economy as well as outlining the Government's response to these developments.
Second, an overview of the current state of the Australian domestic economy  -  highlighting the fundamental challenge of low productivity growth and rising inflation. 
Third, an outline of the Government's long-term micro-economic reform agenda for the years ahead around the central organising principle of Australia's fundamental need for a comprehensive, long-term productivity agenda. 
Global Financial Markets
Today we face a global financial crisis that poses very significant challenges for the global economy as well as our own. The crisis began in the US housing and mortgage market, but has spread rapidly through broader credit markets, equity markets, and is now impacting the real economy. The whole world has been affected.
In part, the current financial crisis represents a repricing of risk following the extraordinary global credit growth of the last several years. This credit growth was characterised by a period of strong economic growth, low interest rates and rapid increases in asset prices (especially the housing and share markets).
These conditions created a financial boom in which credit became widely available and relatively cheap by historical standards. Many investors began to accept higher risks and lower returns  -  as reflected in the decline in corporate investment yields.
In the United States the flow of cheap credit helped spur a burgeoning sub-prime mortgage market. At the same time, advances in financial engineering allowed the development of sophisticated new financial instruments, including loans bundled into Collateralised Debt Obligations. It seems that some market participants did not understand the risks associated with many of these new products.
This became apparent when some sub-prime loans began to default. In mid 2007 there was a sudden loss of confidence in the value of mortgage-backed securities. Financial institutions with heavy exposure to the sub prime market such as Bear Stearns in the US, and institutions with large reliance on securitisation such as Northern Rock in the UK, were dramatically affected. 
As liquidity dried up, the credit crunch in the sub prime market evolved into a general tightening of credit across markets and across financial products. Because the extent or distribution of these risks is not fully known, there has been a reduced willingness to lend  -  the previous market complacency with risk has been replaced by excessive risk aversion. It is important to note that Australia's financial conditions are different to many other countries.
The Australian economy has so far proven to be resilient, despite 12 interest rate rises and the fallout from the global financial crisis. Nonetheless, Australia is not immune from events abroad. As spreads increase, they push up the cost of finance, and lead to higher interest rates for home mortgages everywhere including for Australian working families. The crisis in financial markets is also leading to downward revisions in growth projections for the global economy. The US economy is expected to slow markedly this year, which will see global growth slow from the strong rates of growth recorded in recent years.
Slower world growth will inevitably affect Australia, although the economic strength of North Asia has a capacity to shield Australia from the sharper downturn amongst the G3 economies. But we can take nothing for granted. That is why the Government will continue to pursue a policy of responsible economic management aimed at placing the economy on a stable, long-term growth trajectory. 
And that is why I will take every opportunity to argue the distinct features of the Australian economic case during my visit abroad. 
     * That Australia has a central bank with robust and enhanced independence. 
     * That we have a strong regulatory framework for Australia's financial market. 
     * That Australia has very low domestic exposure to sub-prime mortgage defaults. 
     * That the balance sheets of our principal corporates are strong.
     * That resources demand (from China and India) is holding up strongly and well into the future.
     * That the Government continues to be committed to a conservative approach to budget policy. 
     * That the Government has zero net public sector debt. 
     * And that the Government is not complacent about the need to push ahead with further, long-term economic reform.
 And I will do this because I remain an unapologetic optimist about Australia's long-term economic future despite the challenges that lie ahead. 
Government's response to the global financial crisis
Governments usually face two choices in response to global financial crises.
They can either react to crisis by turning inwards: 
     * by blaming globalisation for exposing them to economic threats that are not of their own making;
     * by trying to erect new barriers to openness; or 
     * by trying to opt out of global financial markets by re-regulating their domestic financial markets.  
Alternatively, governments can choose to hold firm, keep their nerve, and stay the course on policies that will promote stability for the present and continue to reform the economy for the future. It may seem to some that these two goals are in conflict with each other. It may seem to some that we would achieve more domestic economic stability if we were less open to global market volatility.
That is not the view of the Government. Openness and full engagement with the global economy has given Australia much more economic growth than before. Protectionism, by contrast, would limit Australia's opportunities, delivering a sclerotic economy and declining living standards. Australia's engagement with the global economy certainly presents us with challenges, but it also presents us with the responsibility to respond intelligently to those challenges.
By working with our regional and global economic partners we can work towards the restabilisation of the global financial system and address any long-term reforms the system may require. Global economic problems require global solutions.
Australia's response must also involve coordinated action with our economic partners. 
The Government's approach involves several elements including the following:
     * We will continue to monitor liquidity needs internationally and, through the RBA, participate where appropriate in coordinated central bank action.
     * Through the RBA, we will also continue to monitor and maintain appropriate support for liquidity requirements domestically. 
     * We will continue to monitor the Australian financial system in light of the current turbulence to ensure that it remains efficient, flexible and competitive  -  including maintaining competition and choice in the Australian domestic loans market for the benefit of consumers. 
     * We will work with other economies and international financial institutions to improve global standards of transparency and disclosure by financial institutions. 
 As financial markets become more global and assets are traded more quickly between nations, so too must regulation and supervision become more global. The current crisis has highlighted the importance of disclosure and transparency. Loss of confidence in the risk management practices of financial institutions and ratings methodologies as well as weaknesses in disclosure, valuations and financial reporting has been at the core of the crisis. Internationally, we need better rules on the transparency of risk exposures, valuation practices and nature of leverage.
We will work with other economies to improve international risk management systems. This must include: 
     * Options for stronger international financial supervision;
     * Developing improved global standards that will underpin national regimes for transparency, crisis management and stability;
     * Strengthening the co-ordinating mechanisms for providing international surveillance of all countries' financial systems and for identifying systemic risks to the global financial markets; and
     * Ensuring that national authorities respond effectively when specific risks are identified.
This will require efforts by us and others to work closely with the key international co-ordinating agencies, the IMF, the Basel Committee and others, to identify key risks and vulnerabilities and programs of reform. The Treasury, the RBA and the regulators have been discussing these matters with their global counterparts. Pursuing these matters will be a core priority in my engagements abroad over the coming weeks. 
Finally, we will redouble efforts to bring the Doha Round of trade negotiations to a conclusion.
The successful conclusion of the Doha Trade Round would give the global economy a much needed psychological boost at a time when there is a heightened risk of protectionism.
Particularly at a time when the psychology of protectionism may become acute.
It would also demonstrate to developing nations that the advanced economies are serious about honouring undertakings concerning trade liberalisation that were made back in 2001.
The Government's intention is to engage actively with our global economic partners on these important matters in the period ahead. There is no point simply describing the unfolding global economic reality. The Government instead believes we must become an active part of the global economic solution as well: arguing both our own economic case to global investors; as well as arguing the case for appropriate global financial market reform.
Australia's long term productivity challenge
Beyond the uncertainties of the global economy, the Government has inherited a domestic economy from its predecessors that is replete with its own challenges.
In the year leading up to the election, we argued that Australia has in recent years been through a period of extraordinary opportunities as a result of the mining boom. 
We highlighted the fact that the Government had squandered many of those opportunities that could have led to faster growth, by failing to make long term investments in Australia's future productive capacity. I believe history will see the 12 years of the Howard Government as an era of opportunities lost.
The Government had breathtakingly favourable fiscal and economic conditions, like no other Australian government has had. Yet it failed to seize those opportunities. Or even, it seems, to grasp them. The result of inadequate and poorly targeted investment in skills formation, in innovative capacity, in infrastructure, and in budget management now manifests itself in the skills shortages, infrastructure bottlenecks, and inflation challenge that Australian workers and businesses now well understand.
Productivity is, in the long term, the key to building a more internationally competitive economy  -  one that can produce more output from its existing resource base; one that can grow faster without fuelling inflation and consequently, driving up interest rates. 
The need for action on the productivity agenda is clearly underscored by the long downward slide in productivity growth since the late 1990s: 
     * Labour productivity growth in the market sector averaged 3.3 per cent per annum in the five years to 1998-99. 
     * It fell to 2.1 per cent in the five years to 2003-04. 
     * It has fallen further to just 1.1 per cent in the first three years of the current cycle up to 2006-07. 
     * Productivity growth in the market sector fell to zero in the year to December 2007. 
The same trend is evident when we measure Australia's performance against other economies. Australia was ranked behind 14 other OECD nations in the OECD comparison of whole economy productivity levels in 2006. Benchmarked against the United States, the global productivity leader, Australian productivity rose from 77 per cent in 1990 to 85 per cent in 1999, but by 2006 it had fallen back to 79 per cent. 
In comparative terms, Australia has now almost completely lost the relative productivity gains of 1990s. Low productivity growth has contributed to the rising inflationary pressures inherited by the Government last year, with underlying inflation at 3.6 per cent, its highest level in 16 years. Low productivity growth has also made Australian exporters less competitive, contributing to export volumes growing at an average annual rate of just 1.9 per cent in the seven years since 2000, in contrast to the average 6.9 per cent growth over the preceding seven years.
Australia's rising inflation, rising interest rates and the particular challenges on the external account point to significant long term problems that have not been systematically addressed. 
We cannot sustain strong economic growth unless we lift our productive growth. We cannot sustain improvements in living standards unless our productivity growth improves. We cannot meet the challenges of international economic competititiveness if we do not lift our productivity growth; if we do not have a highly skilled workforce; if our workforce is not sufficiently innovative to solve business problems; or if our infrastructure is not modernised to serve our businesses as platforms for growth. 
And so Australia must now begin to implement a policy of long-term reform to boost productivity growth through a productivity revolution.
A new agenda of microeconomic reform  -  towards a productivity revolution
The Government's economic reform agenda is based on the 3 Ps that drive long term economic growth: productivity, workforce participation and population growth.
Investing in a reform program focussed on higher productivity, and higher levels of workforce participation and which deal with the population policy challenges of the future will lift the economy's supply capacity, delivering stronger, non-inflationary growth over the long term. Australia's productivity challenge has been highlighted on at least two significant occasions by the Commonwealth Treasury in its Intergenerational Reports in 2002 and 2007.
Last year's report warned that if nothing changes, average living standards of Australian households over the next four decades will grow at a rate well below previous decades. Treasury has also warned that because our population is ageing, living standards in the next forty years are projected to increase by an average of only 1.6 per cent per year  -  compared to an average of 2.1 per cent over the past four decades. 
The difference may sound small, but a 25 per cent reduction in growth in average living standards means a lot to ordinary households. The conclusion is that productivity growth is going to be more important than ever before if we are to sustain higher living standards with an ageing population. 
Let me be absolutely statistically stark in highlighting the difference between the high and low productivity road to Australia's future. Productivity growth across the whole of our economy has averaged just 1.5 per cent per year so far this decade. 
In comparison, productivity growth was more than one third higher during the 1990s.
The second Intergenerational Report makes the challenge of reversing this trend clear: if future generations are to realise the same growth in average living standards as we have been able to achieve in the past, our productivity growth will have to rise to around 2¼ per cent and be maintained for the next 40 years. 
That's a major task for the nation. That's a major task for the national government.
Australia has not experienced these kinds of productivity gains since the mid to late 1990s, when productivity growth surged off the back off the hard fought reforms of the 1980s and early 1990s. And of course our task is made that much tougher when you consider our starting point. Three years into the current productivity cycle as measures of the ABS, whole economy productivity growth has averaged just 0.8 per cent a year.
I believe we must now embrace a new national objective of getting our productivity growth rate back on track. That is why the Government intends to adopt a number of ambitious targets for the future  -  targets aimed at achieving faster rates of productivity growth for the nation.
Since the beginning of the decade, Australia's annual productivity growth has averaged 1.5 per cent, behind the US (2.0 per cent), the UK (2.3 per cent) and Japan (1.9 per cent). In a decade's time, Australia should aim at realising productivity growth rates that not only keep pace with, but exceed, those of our principal competitors in the OECD. This means implementing a national program of action on productivity growth. 
That is why the Government will be directing the central agencies  -  Prime Minister and Cabinet, Treasury and the Department of Finance and Deregulation - to begin developing specific targets in each of the areas of government policy which directly contribute to increasing productivity growth. 
These productivity targets will be progressively released in the months ahead in each of the key drivers of long-term productivity growth. These productivity-building targets will include, but not be limited to, key indicators for skills, education, innovation, infrastructure, as well as rolling back the regulatory overhang on business.
The Government will begin deploying specific indicators to focus our public investment and over time to track our performance. For example, we already have a target to lift school retention from 74 to 90 per cent.
Furthermore, in vocational education the Commonwealth and States have reached agreement on the need for targeting a halving of the proportion of Australians aged 20 to 64 without qualifications at Certificate III and above, and a doubling of the number of higher qualification completions (diploma and advanced diploma).
But we will be going further. We will set these targets because we are committed to ensuring that government does its part to address the productivity challenge this nation faces. Of course, the Government's productivity agenda starts with an education revolution.
Australia needs a substantial and sustained increase in the quantity of our investment, and the quality of our outcomes across the education, skills and training system. The links between productivity growth and investment in human capital, through education, skills and training, are well established.
That is why we have unveiled substantial initiatives including: 
     * the provision of up to 15 hours per week of early childhood education for all 4 year olds.
     * providing high speed broadband to schools, computers at school for all students from years 9 to 12, and funding of up to $1.5 million for trades training centres at every Australian secondary school; 
     * a strategic focus on vocational training through the Skills Australia expert group and an investment in an additional 450,000 training places over the next five years. 
     * HECS incentives for students who study maths and science as well as those teaching those subjects, and a comprehensive examination of the future of higher education.
     * 1,000 new mid-career research scholarships to help retain and attract the most talented researchers. 
     * A new national curriculum in maths, science, English and history.  
We are also reviewing Australia's whole national innovation system, with the goal of making the changes necessary to foster greater investment in research and development and build a stronger culture of innovation in businesses.
The Government will also be implementing a new workplace relations system from the beginning of 2010  -  for the first time in the nation's history a uniform set of industrial relations laws for the entire private economy of the nation. 
The new system will encourage flexible enterprise agreements and create new flexibilities for common law agreements and modernised awards  -  all designed to support productivity growth. Economic analysis highlights the positive correlation between enterprise bargaining and productivity growth, as research last year from the National Institute of Labour Studies most recently observed.
Second, in addition to the changes in human capital investment that will drive productivity growth, the Government is committed to building advanced infrastructure for the economy of the 21st century.
Our national infrastructure is, quite simply, the physical platform for business growth.
Infrastructure Australia will advise on ways in which barriers or disincentives to investing in nationally significant infrastructure can be removed. Infrastructure Australia has been tasked with developing a nationally consistent regulatory environment for PPPs to encourage large-scale, long-term private investment in public infrastructure. 
In the coming decades our ability to engage in the global digital economy of the twenty first century will be a key driver of our productivity growth. Building a high-speed National Broadband Network will give Australia a platform of modern infrastructure that will allow business, education institutions and families to reap the full benefits of participation in the global digital economy. 
Broadband is a fundamentally transforming technology of the future. Third, reform of the federation, including a wide agenda of business deregulation, represents another important engine of productivity growth.
The reform of Commonwealth/State funding arrangements and the use of outcomes-based payments will create powerful incentives for States and Territories to implement reforms and improve their effectiveness. Later today the Treasurer will be speaking to you about the progress that we achieved yesterday at COAG in Adelaide.
COAG has identified 27 areas for deregulation and red tape reduction to improve efficiency and reduce the regulatory burden on the economy. COAG has agreed that this deregulatory task must begin with the onerous task of creating a single national OH&amp;S system. 
Workforce participation
The flip side of the productivity agenda is lifting workforce participation. As the post-war ‘baby boom' generation moves into retirement, workforce participation will come increasingly into focus as a key driver of long-term economic growth. 
An increase in the number of people participating in the workforce adds to the economy's potential output and raises living standards. The Commonwealth Treasury's Intergenerational Report in 2007 estimated that over the next 40 years the proportion of Australia's population over the age of 65 will double to around 25 per cent.
Over the same period, the proportion of the population participating in the workforce will decline from 65 per cent to an estimated 57 per cent in 2046. With an ageing population, Australia must work to increase the proportion of working age people in the workforce. Australia currently ranks 10th in the OECD on workforce participation. 
While our participation rate is above the OECD average, in specific important cohorts Australia's participation rates are below other developed economies: 
     * for males aged 25 to 54 years, Australia ranked 25th among 30 OECD countries; 
     * for females aged 25 to 44 years, Australia ranked 23rd; and 
     * for older men and women aged 55 to 64 years, Australia ranked 13th within the OECD. 
The 2007-08 Budget noted that Australia would have another 600,000 people in the workforce if we achieved participation rates as high as the top ranking comparable OECD country. 
The Government's strategy to increase workforce participation includes: 
     * First, tax reform targeted at increasing the incentive to work  -  including, but not in the long term limited to, the tax cuts that were announced at the last election and that will begin to be delivered from July.
     * Second, skills reform meaning that new workers are more highly skilled, and that school leavers make a smooth transition from school to work.
     * Third, increasing access to affordable quality child care, by raising the child care tax rebate from 30% to 50% among other measures.
     * Fourth, reforming the interaction of welfare and family payments with our tax system to remove unintended barriers to workforce participation for those currently on the margins of the labour force. Family and child care payments along with social security benefits provide important financial assistance to low and middle income working families. We need to ensure they not only provide an enhanced standard of living but also support workforce participation. 
     * Fifth, a retirement incomes policy that provides a number of options to meet the financial needs of older Australians, particularly for those who choose to continue to work or re-enter the workforce. 
The Government is engaged in long term work in each of these areas because having people unnecessarily outside the workforce represents a waste of economic capacity. And as our demographic challenges become more acute, that is a waste we can ill afford.
The third of the three Ps is population growth. Australia's forecast population trends over coming decades underscore the importance of the productivity and participation agendas. The Treasury's Intergenerational Report has forecast our annual population growth to slow down from an average of 1.4 per cent over the past 40 years to 0.8 per cent over the next 40 years. 
This means that population growth is likely to add just 0.1 percentage point to Australia's average annual growth in living standards (measured by real GDP per capita). This compares with a 0.4 percentage point contribution to annual growth over the past 40 years. 
With the birth rate expected to remain below the replacement rate, we must take further steps to make life easier for parents with young children. This means making workplace laws more family-friendly, improving access to quality, affordable child care and conducting a proper examination of paid maternity leave. 
We must also maintain a significant skilled migration program, one can respond to specific needs such as current and future skills shortages.
At the same time, we must do a better job in planning for the physical and social infrastructure needs of a growing population. 
We need the national imagination to build a big Australia  -  by encouraging natural population growth; by maintaining support for a continued expansion of the migration program consistent with the long term needs of the economy; and by investing to ensure that the long-term infrastructure needs of a growing population are met.
Immigration helps keep a nation young  -  a challenge which Australia must embrace if it is to avoid the decline already evident in a number of competitor economies. 
I am determined to lead a reformist government for the future that develops innovative, long-term solutions to Australia's long-term economic challenges.
That means tackling immediate threats like rising inflation and global financial turbulence. It also means moving forward on the long term agenda to raise productivity growth, workforce participation and population growth.
And the central organising principle underpinning this national agenda of economic reform is boosting Australia's long-term global competitiveness. 
Nobody owes Australia its future. Our responsibility is to build Australia's future. 
And that is the new Government's policy resolve.


It is a great pleasure to stand here in the city that in so many ways symbolises this great country in the eyes of the world and the ties between our two countries. 
A great city which has experienced great tragedy.
A great city with the strength, determination and courage to recover from that tragedy. 
New York means a lot to Australians  -  as so many of the Australian diaspora have made their careers here making a great contribution to America, and as a result of that a great contribution to Australia. 
In recent years, Australian actors have performed in New York as well has having played famous New Yorkers on the stage and the silver screen. 
Hugh Jackman in The Boy from Oz. 
Russell Crowe as Jim Braddock in Cinderella Man.
Naomi Watts held in King Kong's paw above the Empire State Building.
There are also some historical ties between New York State, the Revolutionary War and Australian geographical landmarks.
As we know, in the critical events of 1775/1776, the Revolutionary War was a near run thing here in New York as General Washington retreated across the Hudson with the remnants of the Continental Army. 
Later in 1777 as the tide of the war turned, at the battle of Saratoga, in upstate New York one Polish-born General named Thaddeus Kosciusko played a crucial role in helping inflict a significant defeat on the British. 
Early Polish explorers in Australia named Australia's highest mountain after the self-same Kosciusko  -  a hero of the Revolutionary War and of course a hero of his native Poland. 
I'd like to thank the American Australian Association for hosting my first address on this visit abroad  -  a visit during which I will be addressing a range of economic and strategic priorities in the United States, Europe and China. 
Since its establishment in New York 60 years ago by Sir Keith Murdoch (and I acknowledge the continued support of the AAA by the Murdoch family since then), I understand that the Association has hosted every Australian Prime Minister. 
I also understand that its first dinner was in honour of the great Australian Foreign Minister, Dr H.V. Evatt when he was President of the UN General Assembly.  A photo of that dinner is on the program booklet for tonight.  
That night, “Doc” Evatt, mindful of the high concentration of Wall Street representatives in his audience remarked: “I wonder whether I can be heard above the rustle of securities”.  I think I might face the same difficulty tonight! 
I am very pleased to follow in “Doc” Evatt's footsteps because, like him, I believe that strong American global leadership and a strong and effective United Nations are critical for global stability. 
In fact I met the United Nations Secretary-General this afternoon and I told him that Australia was determined to re-invigorate its engagement with the UN. 
I also confirmed with the Secretary-General that Australia will in 2012 be seeking a seat on the UN Security Council for the term 2013-2014. 
I am very pleased to have the chance to speak tonight to Australians and friends of Australia. 
I want to talk tonight about the critical importance to Australia of a continued close relationship with the United States. 
I also want to talk tonight about the priorities of the new Australian Government, particularly how we and our economic partners approach the core challenge of economic management in a difficult global economic environment. 
The new Australian Government
The new Australian Labor Government is committed to responsible economic management and is unashamedly pro-market, pro-business and pro-globalisation.
That is our policy orientation because we believe it is in the best interests of the working families who trusted us with the responsibility of government.
We strongly support open trade, open investment and an open economy.
The last Labor Government of the 1980s and the first half of the 90s, under the leadership of Bob Hawke and Paul Keating, opened the Australian economy to the world  -  deregulating financial services, aviation, telecommunications and other markets, and removing tariff protection.
 The Government that I lead stands proudly in that tradition.
We are a reformist, outward-focused and future-oriented government.
The Government's mission is to build a modern Australia capable of meeting the challenges of the 21st century.
For the economy, that means building a globally competitive Australia capable of carving out a future in a highly competitive world.
The Government was elected with a strong commitment to a long-term economic reform agenda, with the overall objective of lifting our productivity growth.
We are implementing a comprehensive program of reforms to our education system, ranging from early childhood services through schools and training, right through to universities and research programs.
The aim of our program is to lift productivity.
Developing our broadband infrastructure is also one of the keys to lifting our productivity.  It is a transformational technology.  It can help overcome what one of our greatest historians described as the tyranny of distance  -  both domestically in Australia and in our links with the world.
With the right broadband infrastructure businesses can deliver better services faster to more customers.  It can open up new markets and reduce the barriers to establishing a new business.  It means that people in New York and Perth can do business in real time  -  and with sufficient bandwidth.
Broadband is not the only part of our infrastructure we plan to invest in.  We need world-class infrastructure across the board to ensure we can make the most of economic opportunities  -  encouraging nationally consistent public-private partnership regulatory frameworks.
Another element of our productivity agenda is removing the duplication that exists between Australia's national government and the governments of individual states.
Since coming to office in early December, the Government has revived the Council of Australian Governments.  We have turned this once fractious body into a mechanism through which Federal and State government leaders can meet and work together on common challenges.
Just before I left Australia, the Commonwealth reached an historic agreement with the States to restructure our $70 billion financial support for them by broadbanding 90 separate grants down to five  -  each with performance based grants based on measurable outcomes.
A second key element to our economic strategy is lifting the workforce participation rate by increasing incentive.
To do this we will embark on long-term tax and welfare reform to encourage more people into the workforce.
We have already legislated significant tax cuts for this year's budget.
Our long-term plan (subject to economic circumstances) is to flatten the tax structure over the next six years. 
Our long-term aim is to reduce the number of personal income tax rates from four to three, with a top rate of 40 per cent.
We recognise that reducing taxes provides an incentive for people to enter and remain in the work force.
As the baby boom generation retires, workforce participation will become more important as a driver of long-term economic growth.
The third element of our strategy is population.  With a lower birth rate, we need to do more to help people with young children  -  making workplace laws more family friendly, improving access to childcare and conducting a proper examination of paid maternity leave.
To complement this, we will also maintain a significant skilled migration program that can respond to skills needs in specific areas.
I believe in a big Australia.  That's why immigration tailored to the economic circumstances of the day is important.  It also keeps a country young.
Innovation is also critical to enhance our global competitiveness in the industries of the future.
The development of Australia's financial services sector shows that world-class industries can emerge given the right policy settings  -  and it is worth reflecting for a moment on the global comparative advantages Australia's financial services sector exhibits.
First, the Australian financial sector has one of the soundest regulatory frameworks in the world.
Second, Australia lies in the same time zone as the East Asian hemisphere.  Australia has strong institutional (and, increasingly, linguistic) linkages to financial markets across our region given the increasing number of Australian professionals capable of operating in the principal languages of Asia.
Third, the market capitalisation of the Australian Stock Exchange at more than one trillion US dollars is about three times bigger than Singapore and around half that of the Hang Seng.
Fourth, our funds management industry is the fourth-largest in the world with $1.3 trillion under management courtesy of the superannuation policy reforms of the 1990s by the previous Labor Government.
Fifth, the new Australian Government, consistent with its pre-election commitment, has decided to halve the withholding tax on distributions to non-resident investors in Australian managed funds to 15 per cent, making it much more competitive with comparable tax regimes elsewhere.
Finally, just today, following a meeting with the Chairman of the US Securities and Exchanges Commission, we announced our intention to produce an agreement by year's end for mutual recognition between Australian and US securities regulatory regimes to enhance capital flows between the two economies  -  a global first for both the SEC and its Australian equivalent ASIC.
The future will also see great opportunities emerging in the clean and green energy sector.
As we move to meet the challenge of climate change, innovations that reduce energy consumption and reduce greenhouse gas emissions will be crucial.
Technology like post-combustion capture and storage will be an essential part of the response to climate change.
We can only make the transition to a low carbon economy by developing technological responses to problems.
Other high-tech sectors will be crucial too.  In bio-technology and the life sciences we are fostering innovation.  Australia has a strong record in the medical sciences and our pharmaceutical exports have been growing strongly in recent years  -  averaging 20 per cent per year.  We have a very strong foundation for the bio-technology sector to grow strongly.
These new economy sectors require a highly-skilled workforce.  Supported by new investment by the new Government, Australia's education system is delivering that.  It has also evolved into a crucial export sector for the economy.
Last year over 450,000 international students were studying in Australia.  Education is our largest services export.  It was worth more than 11 billion dollars last year.
My vision for Australia is a modern economy with the best educated, best trained, best skilled workforce in the world.
We will still exploit our comparative advantages in exporting energy, resources and raw materials.
But we also need new industries that can develop on the foundation of a strong skills base, the right infrastructure and the right policy environment.
Our agenda is substantial.  Its implementation will require us to call forth all of the energies and talents of the nation.
There's some pretty good Australian talent living and working in this city and I was suggesting to the President that he might cancel a few of your visas so we can get you back in the trenches at home. There's work to be done!
In mid-April the Government is convening a 2020 Summit in Canberra.  The objective is to call forth the nation's talents, energies and ideas to address Australia's critical long-term challenges  -  from the economy, through the creative arts, to Indigenous policy.
Through a non-government committee we are inviting 1000 of our young brightest and best.  If you are here in New York please lodge your submission to the Summit.
With such challenges ahead, we cannot afford to waste the talent or potential of any Australian. We are committed to an Australia in which nobody is left behind, nobody is taken for granted.  That holds true with special force for our treatment of Indigenous Australians.
On 13 February I presented an apology in parliament to those Indigenous Australians who had been taken from their families in the past.  On behalf of the Government and the parliament I said “sorry”.
I thought it was an important step to take  -  a step towards healing the hurt and a step towards a better future for Indigenous Australians.  The apology was part of a new beginning because old approaches were not working and we needed a first step towards closing the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.
An important part of this new beginning is a commitment to closing the health, life-expectancy and education gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.
In a modern and prosperous Australia, there should be no reason for these gaps to exist.
My vision for Australia's future is for a prosperous nation, and a nation where that prosperity extends to all Australians  -  and that, for example, is why I have stated that the Government's first White Paper will be on homelessness.
Our vision is to build a strong, prosperous Australia in which there is still a fair go for all.
Australia and the World
I have spoken about our agenda for the future  -  our economic and our social agenda.
We also have an active international agenda.
Our engagement with the world is about building on our relationships with partners and international institutions around the world.
It means building on our alliance with the United States.
And it means developing a creative middle power diplomacy to work with our close partners in our region and around the world on challenges like climate change, economic development and countering terrorism.
We believe that this is the rational thing to do in pursuit of our own core economic and security interests.
We also believe it is the right thing to do because Australia can be more of a force for good in the world.
US global leadership
Australia and the United States are historic allies.  Our alliance was forged in the days of the Second World War when we acted together to meet the common danger.
Since the Second World War, the United States has provided the strategic ballast to a stable international order.
In the Asia-Pacific region over the past 30 years, the United States has underwritten regional security and allowed the countries of the region to focus on economic development rather than strategic competition.  This stability has been a crucial ingredient in the region's remarkable economic growth.
The United States' global and regional role is as important today as it has ever been.
It remains central and fundamental to global stability.
Australia and the United States
My position on the role of the United States in global affairs is clear.
I see the United States as overwhelmingly a force for good in the world.
I am proud that Australia and the United States are partners.
It is a partnership that has been supported by parties of both sides in Australia and the United States.
It is an enduring alliance  -  as I said at the White House yesterday, our alliance has been supported by 12 US Presidents, both Republican and Democrat; and 13 Australian Prime Ministers, Labor and Liberal.
It is an alliance shaped by our common achievements in the past.
It is also an alliance defined by our common aspirations for the future.
Our partnership is about more than the formal agreements we have signed.  It is about shared values.  Perhaps that is why we are such natural partners.
During the Second World War, when General Douglas MacArthur was Supreme Commander of Allied Forces in the Pacific, he was based in my hometown of Brisbane.
He was also a regular visitor to The Lodge, where I now live.
In my study, MacArthur and Prime Minister Curtin planned the allied strategy to defend Australia and restore peace to the Pacific.
The strong political and military links that were forged in the dark days of the Second World War are as important to us today as they were then.
The Australia-US relationship is also about our strong economic future.
We have the Free Trade Agreement that provides a framework for ongoing development of our trade.
The United States is the largest foreign investor in Australia.
The United States is the largest destination for Australian outwards investment.
And Australia is the eighth-largest investor in the United States.
The United States is Australia's third-largest trading partner (and what is remarkable about our trade is the prominence of the services sector  -  accounting for around 43 per cent of our exports).
It is a good story of a growing services trade, and one I am keen to see develop even more.
Global Financial Markets
Just as the services trade ties us together more and more, it gives us common cause in meeting economic challenges.
I don't need to convince this audience of the gravity of the global economic challenges we now face.
The current financial crisis represents, in part, a repricing of risk following the extraordinary global credit growth of the last several years.
During this difficult time, we have shared in US concerns about the best response to the financial crisis.
It has been one of the main topics for discussion during my meetings in Washington.
Australia's financial conditions are different to those of many other countries.
The Australian economy has so far proven to be resilient, despite markedly higher interest rates and the attenuation of our own market for asset-backed securities.
We are not of course immune from events abroad.
As spreads increase, they push up the cost of finance, and lead to higher interest rates for home mortgages everywhere including for Australian families.
The crisis in financial markets is also leading to downward revisions in growth projections for the global economy.
The US economy is expected to slow markedly this year, which will see global growth slow from the strong rates of growth recorded in recent years.
And slower world growth will inevitably affect Australia.
Nonetheless, the Australian economy is relatively well placed:
     * Australia has a central bank with robust and enhanced independence. 
     * We have a strong regulatory framework for Australia's financial markets. 
     * The Government is committed to a conservative approach to budget policy. 
     * The Government has zero net public sector debt. 
     * We have very low domestic exposure to sub-prime mortgage defaults. 
     * The balance sheets of our principal corporations and banks are strong.
     * Resources demand (from China and India as well as long-term partners like Japan and Korea) is holding up strongly and will into the future.
     * And the Government is not complacent about the need to push ahead with further, long-term economic reform.
For these reasons I remain an unapologetic optimist about Australia's long-term economic future.
In the face of the challenge of the financial crisis, governments have to choose to hold firm, keep their nerve, and stay the course on policies that will promote stability for the present and continue to reform the economy for the future.
Openness and full engagement with the global economy has given Australia a 17-year period of sustained economic growth.
Australia's engagement with the global economy certainly presents us with challenges, but it also presents us with the responsibility to respond intelligently to those challenges.
The Government's approach involves several elements including the following:
     * We will continue to monitor liquidity needs internationally and, through the Reserve Bank of Australia, participate where appropriate in coordinated central bank action.
     * Through the Reserve Bank of Australia, we will also continue to monitor and maintain appropriate support for liquidity requirements domestically. 
     * We will continue to monitor the Australian financial system in light of the current turbulence to ensure that it remains efficient, flexible and competitive  -  including maintaining competition and choice in the Australian domestic loans market for the benefit of consumers. 
     * Our response to the global financial crisis must also involve coordinated action with our economic partners.   This is a global crisis requiring an integrated global response.
Australia has been a long-standing advocate and driver behind improvements to global standards for the financial sector through the Financial Stability Forum (FSF); the G20 and the IMF.
Through these and other mechanisms, we will work with other economies to improve international risk management systems. This must include:
     * Options for stronger international financial supervision;
     * Developing improved global standards that will underpin national regimes for transparency, crisis management and stability;
     * Strengthening the co-ordinating mechanisms for providing international surveillance of all countries' financial systems and for identifying systemic risks to the global financial markets; and
     * Ensuring that national authorities respond effectively when specific risks are identified.
This will require efforts by us and others to work closely with the key international co-ordinating agencies, the IMF, the Basel Committee and the G20 Group on Global Credit Market Disruptions (which Australia chairs), to identify key risks and vulnerabilities and programs of reform.
These matters formed a core part of my discussions yesterday in Washington, including with the Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund, Dr Dominique Strauss-Kahn.
In my first 24 hours in Washington, I was privileged to meet with the President and the Vice President, the National Security Advisor, the Secretaries of State, Defence and the Treasury, as well as the Chairmen of the Federal Reserve and the SEC.
It was a busy day.  But it was a rewarding day establishing good working relationships with all key members of the Administration.
Finally, we will redouble efforts to bring the Doha Round of trade negotiations to a conclusion. The successful conclusion of the Doha Trade Round would give the global economy a much needed psychological boost at a time when there is a heightened risk of protectionism. Particularly at a time when the psychology of protectionism may become acute. 
I was pleased that President Bush and I saw eye-to-eye on this point.
US leadership will be crucial to getting a result in the Doha Round  -  as will the attitude of other states in the critical months ahead.
Ladies and gentlemen, when Sir Keith Murdoch addressed the AAA in 1951 he lamented the lack of contact across the Pacific.
Today he would be reassured.
Through the efforts of AAA and countless companies, individuals and organisations, as well as governments of all persuasions in Australia and the United States over the years, our relationship is strong.
And I am confident it will become stronger.
As Prime Minister I am committed to building a relationship based not just on our shared history  -  but a relationship built equally on our common future into the 21st century.


It is a great pleasure to be back at Brookings.
It is always a pleasure to be at one of Washington's oldest and most distinguished think-tanks.
I would like to acknowledge John Thornton, Chairman of Brookings and Strobe Talbot, President of Brookings.
John's thoughtful contribution on China in recent editions of Foreign Affairs magazine, his direct support for the China Centre here at Brookings and his role as Visiting Professor at Qinghua University in Beijing all fall within the best traditions of contributing to American public policy debate.
Strobe Talbot of course is synonymous with scholarship on the Soviet Union of the past and the Russian Federation of the future.
Substantively speaking, these guys cover the ground between them from Petersburg to Peking  -  standing as a colossus astride the great Eurasian landmass in the great tradition of Brookingsonian expansionism!
Brookings has also been kind to me over the years in opening its doors to its rich array of scholars, researchers and public policy professionals for which I thank you.
The Australia-US Alliance
One hundred years ago this year, President Teddy Roosevelt's Great White Fleet arrived in Sydney.
Thousands stood on the harbour foreshores to catch a glimpse of 384,000 tons of white-painted steel gliding through Sydney Heads.
The American Fleet was, of course, given a warm welcome  -  not least because we Australians are always up for a party.
The British, the truth be told, were not entirely happy about this level of interest, on the part of their recently federated colonies in Australia, towards this visit by the blue water navy of their former rebellious colonies in America.
Less than a century before, of course, the British had left their own particular calling card on the city-scape of Washington in the war of 1812.
We Australians always also spot an opportunity when one comes along.
First, the Australian Government set about leveraging the Great White Fleet's visit to sway the Australian parliament to fund the building of our own Australian fleet.
And second, we then rejected London's suggestion that our fleet merely be incorporated as a squadron within the British Imperial Fleet.
And so was born the Royal Australian Navy.
And so I thank Teddy Roosevelt, the hero of San Juan Hill, for his contribution to the birth of our own Australian navy which soon will celebrate its own centenary.
US naval visits to Australia have continued ever since, in peace and in war, and your navy has always been welcome.
Our troops were soon to fight side-by-side for the first time in a World War.
In the Battle of Hamel on 4 July 1918  -  ninety years ago  -  American troops first took to the field in battle in the First World War.
And they did so under an Australian commander, General John Monash.
The foundation of our alliance came into being in 1941/1942.
When Australia faced the real threat of foreign invasion, in the words of our Prime Minister John Curtin, Australia looked “to America, free of any pangs as to our traditional links or kinship with the United Kingdom.”
In the darkest days of World War Two, Australia and the United States stood together, fought together and died together to restore peace to the Pacific.
This was a critical turning point in Australian strategic thinking.
The next step was our formal alliance.
Signed in 1951, the ANZUS Treaty remains the bedrock of Australia's strategic policy.
Since then, our alliance has been supported by 12 US Presidents  -  Republican and Democrat  -  and 13 Australian Prime Ministers  -  Labor and Liberal.
Our alliance is based on our common values.
We are robust democracies.
We are prepared when necessary to fight to defend the values for which we stand.
Our alliance is also based on our common strategic interests.
For Australia and the United States, strategic stability in the Asia-Pacific is of crucial importance  -  both now and for the future.
We are both committed to market economies in an open global economic order.
Our alliance is steeped in history. 
But it is also part of our framework for meeting the challenges of the future.
The purpose of my remarks today is to reflect on the continued importance of US global leadership; to reflect on the new Australian Government's foreign policy framework and to make some observations on how we both might engage China in the future and how we might shape together China's engagement with the global and regional architecture of the future.
US Global Leadership
My view of the United States' role in international affairs in the future is simple  -  I believe the United States is an overwhelming force for good in the world.
The US has used its political, military and economic power to provide the strategic ballast necessary to underpin the post-war global order.
The US vision for a post-World War Two international order began with the Atlantic Charter when Churchill and Roosevelt agreed that a new order should emerge from the ashes of war, based on the dual principles of political freedom and economic cooperation.
There then followed the San Francisco Conference that gave birth to the United Nations.
The Bretton Woods Conference that created the IMF, the World Bank and led to the GATT.
And then the Marshall Plan to save Europe.
We should not forget the importance of these institutions.
We should not forget that these institutions provided the framework under which the world has developed and prospered over the past six decades.
Nor should we forget that US global leadership gave rise to these institutions.
Half a century later, various of these institutions are under strain and are in need of reform  -  reform that once again must be driven by US global leadership.
In the Asia-Pacific region, this ballast has been provided in part through the US alliance system with Japan, the Republic of Korea and Australia.
This strategic stability has allowed the countries of the region to focus on economic development.
Countries have been able to focus on competing for market share rather than competing for local or regional strategic superiority.
This has allowed the Asia Pacific region to lead the world in economic development over the past three decades.
The United States has been less centrally involved in the evolution of East Asian and Asia-Pacific regional architecture.
There is no US-led NATO equivalent in the region.
We have ASEAN  -  a home-grown body that has made a remarkable contribution to establishing stable relations between the countries of South-East Asia.
We have APEC that Australia, Japan and Korea were instrumental in developing.
In the security space, we have the ASEAN Regional Forum  -  still the only body in the region that brings all the major players together to focus specifically on security issues.
More recently we have seen the emergence of other ASEAN-based bodies  -  the 10 plus 3 mechanism that began with an informal summit in 1997 and was institutionalised in 1999.
And, most recently, we have seen the East Asia Summit that crucially brings India, Australia and New Zealand into a dialogue mechanism with the countries of East Asia.
Notably, three of these bodies exclude the United States altogether  -  making it more difficult therefore for the US to engage directly in the reform of these institutions although there are other opportunities for the United State to become more directly regionally engaged.
This presents some complex challenges for the future that need to be addressed.
Australian Foreign Policy
The new Australian Government is committed to building a strong, prosperous and outward-looking Australia.
Our strategic goals are to maximise global and regional stability and ensure the global economy remains open.
Through this, we believe we can enhance our economic prospects  -  not just for Australia, but for all nations.
We approach our task as a nation that is fully committed to global engagement.
We are the 15th-largest economy in the world.
Our stock market is valued at over one trillion US dollars  -  three times the size of Singapore; and around half the size of the Hang Seng (which includes of course many mainland China-based companies); and responsible for more foreign listings each year than any other Asian bourse.
Because of superannuation policy reforms we undertook in the 1990s, we have developed a world-class funds management industry that has the world's fourth-largest pool of funds under management.
We are a major supplier of energy and resources to the major economies of North Asia  -  China, Japan and the ROK.
Our resources exports to India are growing and will continue to grow into the future.
Our military budget is the 11th largest in the world.
We have a sophisticated foreign policy establishment deeply enmeshed with the countries of Asia and the Pacific.
We are a country therefore with both global and regional interests.
In the prosecution of those interests, our foreign policy has three pillars: our alliance with the United States; our membership of the United Nations; and comprehensive engagement with the countries of Asia and the Pacific.
Some might argue that these are mutually exclusive propositions. 
I regard them as naturally reinforcing.
To prosecute them, the Government intends to deploy what I have described as “creative middle power diplomacy”  -  both globally and regionally.
This means for example that you will see Australia being more active in the global efforts to meet the challenges of climate change following our ratification of the Kyoto Protocol within a week of taking office.
This means we will be doing more to work with our partners around the world to get real progress against the Millennium Development Goals  -  particularly among the Pacific island nations.
Last month I visited Papua New Guinea and I announced that Australia would seek to develop what I call “Pacific Partnerships for Development”.
Under these agreements, Australia and our Pacific partners will set mutually agreed development outcomes.
In return, Australia will be prepared to offer more development assistance.
The strategy is to provide better assistance targeted at real progress against measures of health, education and basic economic infrastructure.
More broadly, our foreign policy intention is to prosecute a more activist foreign policy in partnership with our allies, friends and, through the UN, the wider community of nations in areas where we believe we can make a difference.
For too long, our voice has been too quiet in the wider councils of the world.
Our Alliance with the United States
The first pillar of our foreign policy is our alliance with the United States.
I am committed to deepening our strategic engagement with the United States.
Closer engagement with the United States gives us the tools to better meet the security challenges of the future  -  both regional and global.
The threat from terrorism is still alive and well.
The war in Afghanistan is a crucial front in the fight against terrorism because it was from there that the insidious attacks were orchestrated against this country nearly seven years ago.
We cannot allow Afghanistan to again become an unfettered safe haven for terrorists.
This should be a concern for leaders around the world  -  in Europe and in Asia as much as it is here in the United States.
We have a responsibility to help the people of Afghanistan build a stable future for themselves.
Published surveys have recently shown that the people of Afghanistan strongly support the US-led action in their country to rid them of the Taliban.
That is why in Bucharest I will be arguing in close cooperation with the US Administration for a more coordinated military and civilian strategy for Afghanistan.
The Australian Government is committed to Afghanistan for the long haul.
But we must have a common strategy with credible burden-sharing if we are to prevail.
Consistent with my commitment to the Australian people, we are changing the configuration of our involvement in Iraq.
Our ground combat troops will be withdrawn but our air and naval elements are remaining and we are significantly increasing our civilian aid program.
I also want to see greater practical cooperation between our militaries.
Importantly, this means making it easier for trade in defence goods between us.
I hope that the Defence Trade Cooperation Treaty will be able to pass the Senate here in Washington soon.
My vision for a closer relationship between our two countries extends beyond the realm of strategic cooperation.
We also need to expand our economic relationship.
We already have the Free Trade Agreement that provides a framework for further development of the trade relationship  -  especially in services.
I was pleased on Saturday to announce with Christopher Cox, Chairman of the SEC, that Australia and the United States would commit to developing a pilot program for mutual recognition between Australian and US securities regulatory regimes to enhance capital flows between the two economies  -  a global first for both the SEC and its Australian equivalent ASIC.
In the current climate of global financial instability, it also crucial that Australia and the United States (and our other partners around the globe) work closely together to coordinate responses.
That is occurring through both multilateral and plurilateral mechanisms like the Financial Stability Forum (FSF); the G20 and the IMF.
In my meetings on Friday with the President, the Chairman of the Federal Reserve and the Secretary of the Treasury, responding to the financial crisis was a central focus of our discussions.
We agree that the global nature of the problem demands a global response  -  based on greater global transparency.
The great thing about the Australia-US relationship is also the depth of the personal ties.
More Australians visit the United States every year than anywhere else other than New Zealand.
Nearly half a million people make the trip each year.
And about the same number visit Australia from the United States.
Later today I will be witnessing the signature of an “Open Skies” Agreement between Australia and the United States.
It is a new era in the aviation links between us that began in 1928 when Sir Charles Kingsford Smith and Charles Ulm made the first aerial crossing of the Pacific from the United States to Australia. 
Its aim is to make it easier and cheaper for even more people to make the air journey across the Pacific to add more strands to our ties.
Membership of the United Nations
A second pillar of our foreign policy is our membership of the United Nations.
The Government is also committed to increasing our engagement with the United Nations.
The United Nations and the UN Charter are central to a global rules-based order.
Australia is a foundation member of the UN. We are proud of the role we played in its establishment.
Particularly the part we played in the drafting committee for the UN charter.
We are also proud of the part we have played in UN Peacekeeping Operations over the years.
Today we have people serving in UN-led or UN approved peacekeeping operations around the world in Sudan, Sinai, Solomon Islands and East Timor.
We are currently the 12th-largest financial contributor to the UN's peacekeeping operations.
On Saturday in New York I met the UN Secretary-General, Ban Ki-moon.
I told him that Australia was committed to reinvigorating its engagement with the United Nations.
I also told him that Australia would, in 2012, be seeking a seat on the UN Security Council for the 2013-2014 term.
I also discussed with the Secretary-General the situation in Darfur. 
I said that we wanted to see Darfur again raised in the Security Council.
The Government in Khartoum has been less than helpful to the UN and we need to do more to get an effective response underway.
A response that provides real security to the people of Darfur.
I said that Australia was committed to providing further humanitarian assistance and was considering whether we could make a modest military contribution to Darfur to supplement the police and military personnel serving already under the UN Mission in Sudan.
The world cannot simply stand idly by while the people of Darfur continue to suffer.
I also informed the Secretary-General that Australia would be increasing its official development assistance budget to a level of 0.5 per cent of GNI by 2015.
A particular focus will be working to get real progress against the Millennium Development Goals.
We are already at the half-way point on the time line established in 2000 for the MDGs.
Progress has been mixed at best.
We need to make sure that all our efforts are delivering results.
We want to be part of the global solution on poverty.
We do not want to just be intelligent and well-informed descriptors of the problems.
We want to work at a practical level with our global and regional partners to deliver real progress against these goals on which we all solemnly agreed back in 2000.
I said to the Secretary-General that Australia was ready to make a strong contribution to reforming the United Nations to make it more effective.
In this, the role of the United States is also critical.
Just as the United States drove the establishment of key international organisations, reforming those same institutions will require active US engagement.
It is the same for the WTO. 
US leadership will be crucial to getting a breakthrough so that we can get an ambitious outcome to the Doha Round of talks this year.
Other institutions also have to meet new challenges.
The IMF has a real opportunity to play a leading role in the response to the current financial crisis.
The World Bank, like the United Nations, would benefit from reform and I support the reform proposals currently being advanced by Bob Zoellick.
Engaging the Asia-Pacific Region
A third pillar of Australia's foreign policy is our engagement with the Asia-Pacific region.
The aim of the new Australian Government is to develop closer bilateral and regional relations with our neighbours.
Australia has an exceptionally close relationship with New Zealand. 
This is based on common security concerns and common action in our immediate region in the South Pacific.
It is also based on the strength of our economic relationship reflected in our Closer Economic Relationship which has now operated for a quarter of a century.
Within the region, Australia has a long-standing and close friend and partner in Japan.
There is a strong economic strand to our relationship  -  Japan has been our largest export market for 40 years and Japanese investment provides many jobs in Australia, particularly in the manufacturing sector.
We also have a close and deepening strategic engagement. Bilaterally, Australia has in recent times strengthened our defence cooperation with Japan.
There is also the important trilateral element to our cooperation. The Trilateral Strategic Dialogue between Australia, Japan and the United States is an important mechanism that allows three close partners in the region to discuss the interests we share, the challenges we face and deliberate on appropriate responses to the same.
Australia also has a close relationship with the Republic of Korea.
Korea's economic rise in the 1970s and 1980s was a remarkable achievement.
This led to a close relationship between our two countries, particularly in the supply of natural resources.
Korea's global giant steel company, POSCO, is one of Australia's largest single customers.
Our relationship also has a strong military component.
Under UN forces, Australian soldiers, sailors and airmen fought in defence of South Korea in the Korean War.
Security on the Korean Peninsula remains important to us today.
I look forward to working with the new Administration of President Lee on our shared economic and strategic interests.
In South East Asia, Australia has a number of vital partners.
Indonesia is our closest ASEAN neighbour  -  and now a fellow democracy.
It is also the world's most populous Muslim nation.
Indonesia has achieved remarkable things in the past 10 years  -  it has made the transition to democracy, embarked on economic reform, and been a solid partner in the fight against terrorism. Indonesians  -  like Australians and Americans  -  know the pain of terrorist attacks on their people.
Indonesia is also a partner with us in the region.
As the biggest country in South East Asia, it plays a natural leadership role.
Bilaterally, our cooperation covers nearly every conceivable field from working against people smugglers to closer security cooperation under the recently signed Lombok Treaty.
We also work with our other friends and partners in South East Asia including Malaysia, Singapore, Thailand and the Philippines both bilaterally and the through the ASEAN mechanisms.
For us, close engagement with region, particularly in building an open inclusive regional architecture that can underwrite stability into the future is crucial.
Elsewhere in our region, we are witnessing the rise of India.
I want to see Australia and India develop closer relations at all levels.
I am committed to developing a broad-based relationship with India  -  political, economic as well as embracing a more substantive security dialogue.
Australia wants to see India included in regional bodies. 
India's inclusion in the East Asia Summit adds a crucial dimension to the EAS.
And we strongly support India's membership of APEC.
This question of the adequacy of our existing regional architecture given the demands of the future is also one that will require our common efforts.
China
The dynamic change-drivers in the Asia-Pacific region are clear to everyone. 
One of the biggest drivers of those changes is the economic emergence of China over the past 15 years.
China started its domestic reform and global opening process 30 years ago this year.
The first steps towards economic reform were measured.
There have been setbacks along the way.
But the results that have been achieved over the longer-term have been unmistakable.
The living standards of the Chinese people have been lifted dramatically.
In the process of developing itself and its people, China has made a critical contribution to global economic growth.
It has become a trading power and is now becoming an investment power. 
China holds nearly 500 billion US dollars worth of US Treasury bonds  -  a second only to Japan's holdings.
The economic transformation of China has seen a big shift in the personal choices available to Chinese people.
Human rights remain a real problem as demonstrated by the recent violence in Tibet  -  problems that require dialogue and restraint.
China's legal system is still developing.
It has come a long way from the turmoil of the 1970s. 
But in a globalised world where intellectual property needs protection, a full functioning, transparent and independent legal system is crucial for investor confidence.
We have to recognise that China's leaders face staggering challenges domestically.
A recent Brookings research, co-authored by my friend Jeffrey Bader, note for the upcoming Presidential election noted the scale of the challenge.
     * Per capita GDP is still only $1600.
     * The population is ageing and there are big inequalities between the coastal and western regions and between urban and rural areas.
     * Air pollution is a major problem.
     * Lack of water is a serious problem in northern China.
     * And China has to cope with moving up to 13 million people a year into urban centres  -  the biggest urbanisation movement in the history of the world.
China's leaders recognise that they cannot make progress against these significant international challenges in a hostile international environment.
So China's focus has been on stability.
In this context, the single most important element of China's foreign relations is, of course, its relationship with the United States.
Since the Nixon visit of 1972, the United States has been actively engaging China.
On Friday, in my discussions with President Bush, I commended the Administration's handling of the China relationship.
The wide range of new senior dialogue mechanisms gives Washington and Beijing channels to deal with emerging challenges before they become problems.
An important development in US policy towards China was in 2005 when then Deputy Secretary of State Bob Zoellick outlined his concept of China as a responsible global stakeholder.
His argument was that China has benefited from the current global international order  -  in both economic and security terms.
And, as a growing power, China should be more than just a passive member of the international order, it should work actively to sustain the system that has enabled its success.
Bob Zoellick's logic is powerful.
It points to the interests that China shares with other members of the international community.
China's own approach is to publicly emphasise its focus on its economic development and the priority it therefore places on a stable global order. 
China has variously articulated its approach as one of “peaceful rise”, “peaceful development” or more recently that of a “harmonious world”.
The idea of “harmony” is not new in the Chinese body politic.
In the early 1900s the Chinese thinker Kang Youwei wrote about “the great unity” or “the great harmony” and proposed a future utopian world free of political boundaries.
It is worthwhile thinking through how we might try and draw these differing concepts of “responsible stakeholder” and a “harmonious world” together.
The idea of a “harmonious world” depends on China being a participant in the world order and, along with others, acting in accordance with the rules of that order.
Otherwise, “harmony” is impossible to achieve.
Therefore, there is on the face of it a natural complementarity between the two philosophical approaches.
And a complementarity that could be developed further in the direction of some form of conceptual synthesis.
In a political and foreign policy system as large and as complex as China's, this provides a potentially useful framework to start bringing together these world-views.
Differences of course will continue  -  but common ground, where found, should be consolidated, developed and if possible built upon.
What we should consider, then, is a course of practical action that may assist in building on the complementarities already inherent in the two approaches.
Specifically:
     * We should welcome any efforts by the United States, China, Japan and others to extend the Six-Party Talks mechanism into a broader security mechanism  -  one that would later be broadened to include other countries. Given Australia's strong economic and strategic interests in North Asia, we would see ourselves as a participant in any such mechanism at the earliest opportunity. But the opportunity should be taken to advance a broader regional security mechanism that may help remove some of the brittleness that might otherwise characterise security policy relationships across what remains a strategically fragile theatre.
     * Second, the ASEAN Regional Forum may provide a mechanism to develop greater regional cooperation on humanitarian responses to natural disasters and to questions of energy security and stability of energy supply, including through open sea lanes of communication. This would provide a further institutional mechanism for engaging China constructively and non-confrontationally in some of the broader security policy challenges of the region.
     * Third, China should be encouraged to play a more active role in bringing the Doha Round of WTO talks to a successful conclusion. China as a global trading power has a vested interest in so doing.
     * Fourth, China could also be encouraged to play a more high profile role in climate change negotiations. As a major economy, China's participation in efforts to find a solution to global action on climate change will be crucial  -  as we negotiate the torturous Bali Road Map to its conclusion in Copenhagen in late 2009.
     * Finally, as China makes the transition from development assistance recipient to donor, it should be encouraged to work with other donors to develop appropriate OECD-consistent norms for development assistance delivery. Having made the transition, China's experience would be invaluable to other developing nations. For Australia, getting development assistance to the Pacific island nations on a stable footing is crucial  -  and we would be happy to partner with China in some pilot projects.
In short, we look to China to make a strong contribution to strengthening the global and regional rules-based order.
There is no simple one line answer to the question of how we should seek to engage China. 
It is a huge country, with complex global, domestic and historical currents that influence its policy decisions.
But one key is to encourage China's active participation in efforts to maintain, develop and become integrally engaged in global and regional institutions, structures and norms.
At the same time, we have to also recognise that China is rapidly increasing its military spending.
China is developing its inter-continental ballistic missile force and other shorter-range rocket forces.
China's maritime capability is also expanding.
We should not at one level be surprised that a more affluent China seeks to spend more on its military.
But China also needs to be aware that its modernisation drive does have an impact on the region. 
It is in part a question of transparency.
It is also in part a question of uncertainties concerning long-term strategic purpose.
We must remain vigilant to changing strategic terrain.
But strategic vigilance must not be allowed of itself to become a self-fulfilling prophecy.
There is nothing pre-determined about US-China conflict in the future.
We decide the future by our actions today. 
And we need to give ourselves the best chance to choose the best future.
We need to have:
     * strong regional and global institutions;
     * a China that is positively engaged in those institutions as a “responsible stakeholder” contributing to a “harmonious” global and regional order;
     * and continued good management of China-US relations by both sides.
For Australia, the single core question of whether ours will be a Pacific century rests on the long-term management of this most critical relationship.
Our predecessors in 1944/45 faced great challenges in building an international order out of the ruins of the last global war.
But out of their actions arose a stable international order built on the United Nations, Bretton Woods institutions and the continued strategic ballast provided by the United States.
That order has delivered remarkable prosperity and stability for more than half a century.
Our mission for the century ahead must be to enhance that stability and prosperity by meeting the challenges that lie now ahead head on. Rather than pretending these challenges might go away.
Australia stands ready to assist in dealing with these great challenges of the future.


When I first began talking about a visit to Washington I said I wanted to have a chance to talk directly with the business community.
I want to thank The Chamber for the opportunity to address you tonight.
Australia and the United States are intimately linked in the global economy. 
Those links go back a long way.
150 years ago, Californian gold prospectors were scurrying on to boats to Australia to be a part of the Gold Rush that opened up much of inland Australia.
In fact, one very prominent American came to Australia in the 1890s following the mining boom in Western Australia. 
President Herbert Hoover spent about a year and a half in Western Australia planning and developing mine sites.
Hoover came back to Australia a number of times on mining projects and was a pioneer in the mining industry in Broken Hill  -  the city from which our great Australian resource company BHP gets its name.
Today, a different generation of business people shuttle between Sydney, Melbourne, Perth or Brisbane and cities like New York, Los Angeles, Chicago and Atlanta.
The United States is the largest foreign investor in Australia.
The United States is likewise the biggest investment market for Australian businesses. 
And you maybe surprised to learn that Australia is America's 8th-largest source of foreign direct investment.
Corporations with operations in both countries form part of the global supply chain of everything from movies to motor vehicles, and from website design to wine.
Employees in both nations report to CEOs on the other side of the Pacific.
People, ideas, capital, goods and services flow freely between our countries.
Our economic ties are one part of our relationship.
But the relationship is also about the political and strategic links we share. 
Links that are based on shared values.
And I shared vision for the future.
I want to address a number of these themes this evening concerning our common economic future at a time of growing global economic stress.
First, the strengths of the Australian economy in the face of the current global financial crisis.
Second, the global response to this crisis and especially the role we in Australia are playing in cooperation with our economic partners in promoting a coherent global response.
Third, the emergence of China as a major global economy, and the opportunities and challenges this presents to the U.S. and Australian economies.
Fourth, how increasing our commitment to freer trade through re-invigorating the Doha round is now more than ever necessary to give the global economy a real injection of confidence.
And finally, the economic importance of getting our response to climate change right.
Australia in the global economy
The global economy is facing some considerable uncertainty at present because of the global financial crisis. 
 I will talk more about our response to the crisis later in my remarks.
But I want to first explain a little about the Australian economy.
I am an absolute optimist about Australia's long-term economic prospects.
Australia's economic fundamentals are strong. 
We are now in our 17th year of continuous economic growth.
Our major corporations and our major banks are healthy, highly profitable and with balance sheets in very good order.
We are a first-rate investment destination, an active global trader and enmeshed with economic ties around the globe.
We are continuing to deepen our trading and investment links into crucial markets in Asia such as China, Japan and the Republic of Korea.
Australia is a major energy, food and resources exporter, but those sectors employ only five per cent of our workforce.
The vast majority of Australians work in services sectors and these sectors are becoming increasingly internationalised.
We have the largest funds management industry in Asia.
In fact it is the fourth-largest in the world.
The Australian stock market is one of the largest in the region  -  worth more than one trillion US dollars.
It is about three times the size of the Singapore market and half the size of Hong Kong's Hang Seng, where many mainland China public listings occur.
The Australian Stock Exchange is also hosting the largest number of foreign listings in Asia. 
And in all this we are supported by a skilled workforce with considerable international exposure and particular experience in the Asia-Pacific region.
Nearly 23 per cent of Australians were born overseas.
Just over 40 per cent of Australians have a parent born overseas.
And Chinese (Mandarin and Cantonese) is now the second most spoken language in Australia after English.
The mission of the Government that I lead is, in short, to build a modern Australia  -  one that is ready to tackle the challenges and seize the opportunities of the 21st century.
Our task is to look ahead and to prepare our people, our institutions, our education systems and our infrastructure for the challenges of tomorrow.
The Government that I lead does not believe we can retreat from change.
The new Australian Labor Government is committed to responsible economic management and is unashamedly pro-market, pro-business and pro-globalisation.
We do not believe it's in the interests of our people to pull back from full participation in the global economy.
There will be no retreat into protectionism  - notwithstanding the rise in protectionist sentiment elsewhere in the world.
The long-term economic priority of the Government that I lead is to lift long-term productivity growth.
Higher productivity and higher levels of workforce participation deliver stronger, non-inflationary economic growth and increased employment for working families.
The Government's productivity agenda shapes our priorities for an education revolution from early childhood through to schools, training, universities and research.
The productivity agenda includes working with the private sector to build advanced infrastructure such as a high-speed national broadband network  -  critical for Australia to overcome the tyranny of distance.
It also means improving the operation of government between the Federal and State levels  -  an area where we achieved some historic changes last week when we began overhauling the entire financial relationship between the Federal and State governments in Australia.
The Government is also currently reviewing Australia's national innovation system.
Our goal is to foster greater investment in research and development and build a stronger culture of innovation as a platform for enhancing our global competitiveness.
We are doing this because we realise that in a globalised world it is our human, physical and intellectual capital that forms the basis of our enduring global competitiveness.
The global financial crisis and Australia's response
There are at present powerful cross-currents running through the world economy. 
The current global financial crisis represents a significant risk to the prospects for growth of many economies. 
In contrast, emerging market economies such as China and India are continuing to grow strongly.
In doing so they are dramatically expanding the supply capacity of the global economy while stimulating demand for commodities.
We are acutely aware of these cross-currents in Australia.
Our businesses and households are facing higher interest rates  -  in part, reflecting the higher global costs of borrowing.
This is happening while Australia's mining sector and banking sector continue to enjoy strong profits.
I don't need to convince this audience of the gravity of the global financial crisis which began in the US housing industry and home mortgage market, and has now spread through other security markets, equity markets and onto the real economy.
The current financial crisis largely represents a repricing of risk following the extraordinary global credit growth of the past few years.
This credit growth was characterised by a period of strong economic growth, low interest rates and rapid increases in asset prices (especially the housing and share markets).
These conditions created a financial boom in which credit became widely available and relatively cheap by historical standards.
Many investors began to accept higher risks and lower returns.
The flow of cheap credit saw lending extended without sufficient attention to risk.
The specific problem in the sub-prime mortgage market spread all the more rapidly because advances in financial engineering were rather more rapid than the increase in the market's ability to understand the risks associated with many new products based on asset-backed paper.
As liquidity dried up, the credit crunch in the sub-prime market evolved into a general tightening of credit across markets and across financial products.
Because the extent or distribution of these risks is not fully known, there has been less willingness to lend  -  the previous market complacency with risk has been replaced by total risk aversion.
During my time here in the US, I have spoken at length about these challenges with President Bush, the Secretary of the US Treasury, the Managing Director of the IMF, the Chairman of the Federal Reserve, and the Chairman of the SEC.
In these meetings, I have outlined how Australia will contribute to what must be a global response by our national regulators to a global financial crisis.
As financial markets become more global and assets are traded more rapidly between nations, so too must regulation and supervision become more global.
But without crushing the capacity of markets themselves to respond flexibly to new opportunities in the future.
Australia is a long-standing advocate and driver of improvements to global standards for the financial sector. 
To improve international risk management systems, our global response should include: 
     * Options for stronger international financial supervision;
     * The development of improved global standards to underpin national regimes for transparency, crisis management and stability;
     *  Strengthening the co-ordinating mechanisms for providing international surveillance of all countries' financial systems and for identifying systemic risks to the global financial markets; and
     *  Ensuring that national authorities respond effectively when specific risks are identified.
This requires us and others to work closely with the key international co-ordinating agencies, the Financial Stability Forum, the IMF, the Basel Committee, the G-20 and others, to identify key risks and vulnerabilities and programs of reform.
Australia is an active participant in many of these international efforts.
Australia is chairing the G20 Study Group on Global Credit Market Disruptions examining the causes of the recent credit market transactions and international transmission mechanisms.
The Reserve Bank of Australia is contributing to the work of the Financial Stability Forum.
This important forum comprised of 12 countries with significant financial markets and key international financial institutions, met in Rome just two days ago.
The FSF will soon report to G7 Finance Ministers on a range of regulatory and private-sector actions to strengthen the resilience of the global financial system.
Their report will identify the key weaknesses underlying the turmoil and recommend responses to enhance market and institutional resilience.
The report will also set out policy recommendations in the areas of: prudential oversight of capital; liquidity and risk management; transparency; disclosure and valuation practices; credit ratings; and authorities' responsiveness to stresses in the financial system.
The Chair of the FSF will present key conclusions to the International Monetary and Financial Committee (IMFC) on 12 April 2008. 
The Australian Treasurer, Wayne Swan, will be attending this IMF meeting to reinforce our message about the importance of developing an effective global response to the financial crisis.
Today, the US Treasury Secretary, Hank Paulson, released recommendations for a stronger regulatory system for the US financial sector.
He outlined the US Treasury's objectives-based approach to address particular market failures by focusing on three goals: market stability; prudential financial regulation; and business conduct regulation.
I welcome the Treasury Secretary's review as an important part of the US response to the global financial crisis.
We will be examining these recommendations closely as we progress our approach to the global crisis.
The Australian Government believes we must be an active participant in a coherent global economic response.
China in the Global Economy
I mentioned earlier that the cross-currents in the global economy are keenly felt in Australia.
And one of the biggest currents that we feel is from the economic rise of China.
There is little doubt that what we are witnessing in the rise of China is a major historical change.
China's impact on the global economy has been significant in recent years. 
Never before has such a large economy grown so quickly, with the possible exception of late 19th century, early 20th century America. 
In a globalised world, the impact of China's growth is felt everywhere.
This growth has lifted hundreds of millions of people out of poverty in China. 
It has helped to provide stability in China as it seeks to manage internal challenges like the rapid pace of urbanisation, widening income gaps between its urban and rural populations together with a raft of growing environmental challenges.
In the process of growing its own economy, China has also helped to drive global growth. 
Last year, in purchasing power parity terms, it contributed over one-quarter of global growth according to IMF calculations.
China's low-cost manufacturing capacity has provided the world with cheaper consumer goods and cheaper inputs into business. 
This has helped to keep inflation down in the United States, Australia and other economies.
It has also raised the living standards of people in advanced economies like our own.
In Australia, we have felt the force of China's growth. 
China needs fuel and raw materials to drive its growth and Australia has helped to supply them. 
The value of our minerals exports alone to China has grown five fold in five years.
But it is not just about the headline figures for resources trade. 
China is now our top market for education exports  -  over 100,000 Chinese students enrolled in Australia last year.
4,200 Australian businesses export to China.
More than 3,000 businesses are active within China.
In the face of financial instability, the economic benefits of a growing China have to be recognised.
The United States too is benefiting from economic growth in China.
China is the US' third largest goods export market and its fastest growing export market.
US investors are also benefiting from their engagement with China.
While I understand the political sensitivities in the United States about the downside impact of China's economic rise, it's also important to be reminded of the upside as well.
WTO
In the face of global difficulties, it is important that the world accelerates the momentum for the drivers of global economic activity.
A crucial element of that is keeping up the momentum for freer world trade.
We salute the leadership role that the United States has played over the years in establishing the global rules-based trading system.
The raft of agreements which are now together overseen by members of the World Trade Organisation have unblocked barriers to trade, provided new certainty for businesses and investors, and have been an important driver of economic globalisation. 
As a result of this system, countries around the globe, both developed and developing, have been able to sell their goods to others, and we have all been able to access cheaper goods.
Both producers and consumers around the globe have benefited and poverty levels have reduced.
In days of economic difficulty, we need to remind ourselves that it is all the more important to collaborate effectively to ensure that trade can flow freely  -   unencumbered by artificial barriers constructed by government which ultimately damage working families through higher consumer prices.
Tonight I would like particularly to emphasise the importance of pushing together for an ambitious conclusion to the Doha Round.
The negotiations are at a critical stage.
Over the past six weeks, there has been some encouraging progress in the Doha Round in the core areas of agriculture, industrial products and services.
We need to lock in the shape of the deal as soon as possible. 
This needs to happen soon, in the next four to five weeks, for the Round to conclude by the end of the year. 
We believe that not only is this do-able, but it is really our best chance at giving the global economy a psychological shot in the arm.
Political dynamics in the US, the EU and other countries means that failure to conclude a deal this year may see the Round going into cold storage for several years.
This would be to no one's benefit and would seriously undermine the global trading system.  The moment is now! 
I have discussed the WTO in my meetings here. 
I am very encouraged by the strength of President Bush's commitment to concluding the Doha Round. 
It is important that the Congress back the President's commitment.
US leadership is critical.
But so too is leadership and preparedness to move on the part of the other principals to the Round.
We also agreed that the deal needs to be an ambitious one, not a nominal one  -  one that can make a real difference to trade flows. 
What this means of course, is that every WTO member must step forward with an offer that makes the Doha Round outcome worthwhile. 
The time of gamesmanship is over  -  the stakes are too high.
Climate Change
When discussing the future economic terrain, you cannot ignore one other critical matter  -  climate change.
Climate change is the great moral and economic challenge of our time. 
And it requires a combination of effective domestic and global action.
Domestically, Australia has committed to introducing an emissions trading scheme by 2010.
We have also committed to a long-term target of reducing our carbon emissions by 60 per cent over 2000 levels by 2050. 
Globally, the change that we must achieve over coming decades in response to the climate threat is as great in scale as the Industrial Revolution.
We must move to a low carbon economy.
That will mean a profound shift in the Australian economy and in the global economy. 
We will have to make that shift in a way that maintains our competitiveness.  That is why we need a global approach to climate change.
Australia is the world's largest exporter of coal.  For us, developing clean coal technology is a crucial part of our response to climate change.
That's why we're investing in accelerating the development and deployment of these technologies  -  the Government working with the private sector to find commercially viable solutions to climate change.
The low carbon revolution will also open up new opportunities in new sectors.
Already Australian businesses are building wind farms in China, licensing solar power technologies around the world and leading research in geothermal and wave energy.
Global arrangements need to support and encourage the trade in clean and green technology.
The other crucial element to meeting the challenges of climate change is establishing an effective international framework. 
The first act of the new Australian Government was to sign the papers to ratify the Kyoto Protocol. 
We did this because we believe that Australia  -  like all nations  -  has to play its part to find the global solution.  And the best way to do that is by being part of the process.
The road map to a new climate change agreement that we agreed to in Bali in December will need to be closely followed.
In my discussions with the US Administration over the past few days I have stressed that Australia is committed to working closely with the United States to find a way forward on climate change.
Once again, the world needs US leadership.
Over 50 years ago and in the midst of the Second World War, under the leadership of Labor Prime Minister John Curtin, Australia's relationship with the rest of the world began to shift.
Australia became more outwardly focused and took the first steps in reinventing itself as modern economy.
This is a great legacy.
It drives us to seek global responses to global challenges.
My visit here has come at a turbulent time for the global economy. 
How we can best respond to the situation has been a focus of my discussions with business and government figures here.
As have the challenges of climate change and world trade.
There is no doubt these are big challenges.
However, I am an absolute optimist about our ability to meet these challenges just as I am an absolute optimist about Australia's long-term future.
More than that, I am an absolute optimist about our ability to seize the opportunities of the future.
But we must work together to seek coherent global solutions.
To do that, Australia will engage directly and actively with our partners around the world.
One of the most important partners for us is the United States. 
I am committed to keeping that partnership strong.
Together we can seize the opportunities and confront the challenges that will face our economies in the future, just as we have in the past.


About 100 kilometres south west of here is the French town of Noreuil.
On this day  -  the 2nd of April  -  in 1917, a soldier with the Australian 50th Battalion, Private J.C. Jensen won the Victoria Cross  -  the Australian military's highest award for bravery. 
He captured a machine gun post and took forty prisoners.
But I mention Private Jensen for more than his bravery. 
He says a lot about the links between Australia and Europe. 
He was an Australian fighting on the side of European allies in a terrible and bloody war.
Private Jensen was one of nearly half a million Australians who fought with European allies in that war to end all wars  -  fifty thousand of whom still lie in the ancient fields of this continent.
And they were soon to be followed by thousands of sailors and airmen who fought once again with their European allies (this time against Fascism).
Private Jensen himself had come from Europe. 
Private Jensen had been born in Loegstoer, Denmark, about 700 kilometres north east of here.
He was one of the multitude of Europeans who, in the course of the past 200 or so years, has made the journey to Australia to start a new life.
Today I would like to talk about a new life for the relationship between Australia and Europe.
One where we cooperate more closely on security, trade, development, and the great moral and economic challenge of climate change.
New beginning
The historical connections between Europe and Australia are profound.
Europe has nurtured Western civilisation.
Australia has inherited, embraced and adapted that great civilisational tradition. 
The modern state of Australia is heir to European philosophical and political thought.
We owe Europe a debt of gratitude for our stable system of government that has served us well over the 107 years of our federated history.
And our system of government has endured largely unchanged for more than a century already.
One reason these institutions are so enduring is that they sit on a solid foundation of centuries of European political philosophy and institutional pedigree.
At its core, this foundation is about the rights of the individual and the need for government to be accountable to the citizens they serve.
It is a noble heritage that we are proud to be part of.
But we cannot afford simply to look nostalgically back at history when we talk about Australia's relationship with Europe. 
There is too much change in the world today to only hark back to our common foundations.
Globalisation is creating a new generation of deeper, broader political, economic and personal ties right across the globe.
It is changing the way individuals and nations deal with each other.
The new technologies of globalisation are now drawing people together across continents  -  increasingly in defiance of classical geographical definitions of “region”.
If we want to look at the changes taking place in the world, one need look no farther than Brussels.
Brussels, this city, is the heart of a new experiment in sovereignty. 
Just as the treaty of Westphalia in 1648 set the ground rules for national sovereignty for centuries to come, Europe is now at the forefront of developing new notions of sovereignty.
The senseless loss of life of two world wars taught Europe bitter lessons.
The countries of Europe have made an historic decision to seek a new level of shared sovereignty between nations that transcends the normal notions of international relations. 
They are seeking to develop a strong set of rules, norms and institutions to ensure cooperation between the nations of Europe.
And in 2009 this experiment will reach a new stage. 
Once EU member states ratify the Lisbon Treaty, Europe will have a dedicated High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy.
The question for this new EU High Representative will be what will he or she stand for? 
What sort of Europe will this office represent?
What will be the foreign policy of Europe?
What will be the security policy of Europe?
And how will these policies differ from the national policies of the member states?
I do not know the answer to this question, but I know that as the answer emerges in the years ahead, it is likely to have a profound impact on the international society of states.
Europe is already a force for stability in the world. 
Not just in the absence of major wars from its own soil
Europe has assumed a leading role in helping Kosovo make the transition to an independent state.
Europe has also played a key role in advancing development, security and governance in Africa.
Of course the evolution of politics in Europe is not the only change we see.
With the end of the Cold War more than 15 years behind us now we are seeing a new and much more flexible global order. 
No longer do we see a competition of bloc against bloc as the foundation of international relations. 
We see nations cooperating with each across traditional groupings on the complex challenges all nations face.
As the world changes, and as Australia and Europe change with the world, out two peoples will share ever more convergent interests in an ever more shrinking world.
Europe's global reach
Europeans have settled all over the globe.
The contribution of Europeans to Australia has been so strong that it almost seems redundant to mention it. 
The European migrants that came to Australia after the Second World War and changed forever the way Australians lived, talked, ate and played.
In the process, many of these migrants, quite literally, built Australia.
They participated, for example, in the building of large scale national engineering projects like the Snowy Mountains scheme.
They came in their thousands and built a massive hydro scheme in the middle of nowhere which today displaces 4,500,000 tonnes of carbon emissions each year.
Australia offered a new start to millions of people seeking a new life away from war ravaged Europe. 
Today, some two million Australians were born in Europe and nearly 90 per cent of Australians claim some European ancestry.
But some time in the past, at a political level, Australia and Europe began to focus more on what divided us than what pulled us together. 
At the government level, we began to focus on our differences over trade policy, rather than remembering the trade and investment between our two economies is of intrinsic importance.
We have to be honest and frank about our differences. 
But should also work together where we have shared interests.
This principle extends beyond just Australia and the European Union. 
From time to time we will have policy differences with close friends and traditional partners like the United States.
Governments must make their own policy choices based on their assessment of the national interests. 
But we should not be hamstrung from future action by past problems. 
Europe in the world and Australia and Europe
Australia and Europe should take a broad view of our relationship.
Europe's GDP is more than $16 trillion  -  making it even larger than the United States.
Europe's financial markets are among the world's oldest.
They draw upon a deep pool of specialist knowledge in asset management, banking, finance and insurance. 
And today Europe's financial services firms rank amongst some of the world's largest.
The introduction of the Euro has helped reduce transaction costs and the bolstered development of a larger and more liquid debt and stock market.
The Euro serves more than the 320 million people within its member countries.
It has become a central currency in global financial markets.
It is the second most heavily traded currency in global foreign exchange markets, after the US dollar, with some 37 per cent of daily foreign exchange turnover involving the Euro on one side of the transaction.
Australia, like Europe, is closely linked to the global economy. 
We are the 15th-largest economy in the world.
Our stock exchange is among the largest in Asia  -  and has the largest number of foreign listings.
Our financial services sector has the world's fourth-largest pool of funds under management.
As two global economies, Australia and Europe are closely connected through trade and investment.
We also have strong ties in education and research.  
The EU is Australia's largest scientific partner. 
We have the Forum for European-Australian Science and Technology cooperation  -  called FEAST. 
FEAST, which is hosted by the Australian National University in Canberra, works to boost connections between Australian and European researchers.
Australia and Europe are both focused on building economic futures based on education and innovation. 
You might have heard of the Square Kilometre Array project. 
The goal is to build the world's biggest virtual radio telescope by linking together hundreds of smaller telescopes connected together through a super computer. Australia is bidding to host this project. 
I hope we can count on European support. 
It would open up even more avenues for scientific cooperation and collaboration between us.
Common challenges
Australia and Europe have a shared interest in working together to shape the changing world in ways that serve our needs.
And there are many ways we can work together.
Four weeks ago I was in Honiara, the capital of Solomon Islands. 
Solomon Islands is a country of 500,000 people that lies to Australia's north. 
It is one of our Pacific island neighbours. 
The Solomon Islands has had a difficult time in recent years  -  internal political strife and a stalled economy.
Australia has taken a leading role in helping Solomon Islands overcome its problems.
And I am pleased to say that the European Union has been an important partner in our efforts.
While I was in Honiara I opened a new National Public Health Laboratory. 
This laboratory will help Solomon Islands diagnose diseases, monitor outbreaks and improve food safety. 
It will make a real difference to the health of the people of Solomon Islands.
And our partner in this project, along with the Solomon Islands Government, was the European Union.
I hope that, in the future, we can do a lot more of this sort of cooperation, recognising as I do that the European Union is the world's largest provider of international development assistance.
If we work together, we will be able to help developing countries make better progress towards the Millennium Development Goals.
The international community agreed to the MDGs in 2007 and we are now at the half way point in the time line we set for ourselves.
Progress against the MDGs has been mixed at best, so we should look at better cooperation and coordination to deliver more effective development assistance.
Australia is keen to work more closely with the European Union and other major donors including the World Bank.
For Australia, the focus of our development assistance program is on the Pacific island nations.
The Australian Government is looking to negotiate new agreements  -  what I call Pacific Partnerships for Development  -  with the Pacific island nations to offer them greater development assistance in return for progress against mutually agreed goals.
I also want to recognise the close cooperation we have with Europe in the security field. 
Tomorrow I am going to Bucharest for the NATO meeting on Afghanistan.
Afghanistan is an example of why we need to work hard on security problems.
Afghanistan under the Taliban became a haven for terrorists.
These are the terrorists that planned and executed the attacks on the United States on 11 September 2001  -  which was in every respect an attack on the collective civilisation of the West.
Australia is an ally of the United States.
Much of Europe is an ally of the United States.
Those attacks saw the cold blooded murder of over 3000 people from all over the world. 
We have to make sure we prevent the threat of similar attacks in the future.
One important part of that strategy is helping Afghanistan become a stable country  -  no longer a safe haven for terrorists and drug lords.
It will be a long-term commitment.
It will involve putting our troops in harms way to provide security for the people of Afghanistan.
It will mean agreeing an integrated effective and collective military and civilian strategy.
It will mean all countries needing to pull their weight.
And it will mean agreeing on an effective strategy for eliminating Afghanistan's opium crop which goes to fund so much of the terrorist activity that we are fighting.
The time has come to end the disagreement on so fundamental an element of our overall Afghanistan strategy.
World Trade Organisation
Just as we need to help meet the specific security needs of individual states, we also have to make sure that there are economic opportunities to spur development around the world.
With the world's financial markets facing turbulence, we need to maintain the momentum for trade.
And to achieve that, an ambitious outcome to the Doha Round of WTO negotiations is crucial.
I believe, after the discussions I've had in the United States and here in Brussels today, that a successful conclusion to the Doha Round is within our reach this year. 
The global economy now desperately needs a shot of confidence in the arm.
Over the past five years, world trade has grown twice as fast as world output.
The message from this is clear: an important means of ensuring sustainable economic growth is to continue expanding trade opportunities.
Expanded trade opportunities  -  when combined with efforts to assist developing countries better integrate into the global economy  -  can make a real and substantial difference to development. 
What we need now is to see Ministerial engagement in the Doha negotiations as soon as possible after the release of the revised negotiating texts on agriculture and industrial products. 
These revised negotiating texts are expected in the next few weeks.
There are substantial economic gains on offer from the Round for all states  -  not just for some.
First, a successful Doha Round will bind in legal terms the significant unilateral trade liberalisation that has occurred since the Uruguay Round, thereby providing greater certainty to business.
Second, it will deliver meaningful new market access opportunities in all sectors: agriculture, industrials and services.
Third, it will lock in the elimination of export subsidies in agriculture once and for all and see a substantial reduction in domestic agricultural subsidies.
Fourth, it will see improvements in a range of other areas such as trade facilitation, which will reduce the red-tape and other costs of international trade for business.
Finally, it will reinforce the primacy of the World Trade Organisation as the body which sets the rules under which global trade is conducted.
There is still a lot of work to be done, but a deal is within our reach.
Let us imagine what a final deal on Doha might look like.
     * On agriculture it could deliver cuts of up to two-thirds or even more to trade distorting domestic support and tariffs in developed countries;
     * On industrial products it could deliver significant tariff cuts in developed countries and major developing countries  -  bringing most of these tariffs down to the teens and in many cases single digits;
     * On services it could legally bind unilateral liberalisation that has been made since the Uruguay Round and deliver new commercial opportunities in a wide range of sectors  -  transport, telecommunications and professional services. 
If we can achieve such a deal (and such a deal is, I believe, now within our reach), it will be a real boost to global trade.
All countries have an interest in a strong multilateral trading system based on agreed rules.
Given its leadership role, the European Union has an important part to play in ensuring that the Doha negotiations are brought to a successful conclusion.
It is normal past practice for Australian Prime Ministers and Ministers to travel to Brussels , bash up the Commission, issue a press release, then go home.
And it has not been unusual for the Commission to do the same.   
In a departure from normal practice and protocol, I do not intend to do this.
Certainly we have significant differences on trade policy  -  and I will certainly be defending Australia's economic interests  -  in particular those of our farmers.
But rather than shout at each other, I have proposed a new radical approach of talking with one another instead  -  and working intensively together in the weeks ahead to produce real outcomes for us all.
Australia is committed to working closely with the EU towards this end, a point which President Barroso and I have affirmed during my visit to Brussels.
I will continue to make Doha a priority in my engagement with other Leaders in the weeks and months ahead, including when I attend the G8 Summit outreach session in Japan in July. 
Leadership will need to come from all of us  -  the United States, Europe, China, India, Brazil, Indonesia  -  and the Cairns Group which Australia heads.
Leadership will require intelligent flexibility.But without it, the cost of failure is just too great  -  as the world would once again yield to the forces of protectionism.
And protectionism is the enemy of all our economies  -  and the enemy of the standards of all our working families who will pay the price if protectionism prevails.
Climate change
The biggest challenge the world faces in the decades ahead is climate change.  
It is the great moral and economic challenge of our time.
It will require concerted global action to overcome. 
We need the right domestic policies  -  such as cap and trade carbon markets and policies to promote energy efficiency. 
And we need the right international policies too.
Australia's ratification of the Kyoto Protocol underlines the fact that we are ready for the serious action required to address climate change.
I was pleased that Australia and the European Union could work effectively together (and with others) in Bali to help launch negotiations on a new, international post-2012 framework that will see all countries contribute.
We want to see “top-down” emission reduction targets for advanced economies and specific commitments to action by developing countries.
But we need to do more than that. 
We also have to support large-scale cooperative efforts to develop new low-emission technologies and to reduce deforestation.
A key element of this will be developing effective mechanisms for funding and supporting adaptation, particularly in the least developed countries and vulnerable small island states.
Australia is keen to promote a more pragmatic approach to negotiations that moves beyond the rhetoric of the past. 
To support the UN negotiations, we are also working through the Major Economies Meetings process, the climate change forums under the G8, and engaging in strategic bilateral dialogue with key countries  -  including China.
Emissions trading is at the heart of Australia's and the EU's drive to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
 Australia and Europe have a lot to gain from more frequent dialogue, information sharing and exchange of expertise on carbon markets.
And again I would propose that we become effective partners on climate change along the road to Copenhagen.
Australia and Europe should remember what we have in common. 
Not just the history  -  but also the goals we share for the future.
Europe wants to build on its stable political foundation and the freedoms its people enjoy to enlarge the democratic project.
That is what Australia wants too.
We both recognise, I believe, that we need to work more closely with each other and with other partners around the world.
Today I want to leave you with one clear message: the new Australian Government is committed to building a new, positive partnership with Europe  -  a new economic partnership, a new security partnership, a new development partnership and a partnership on climate change.
But it takes two to Tango.
Let's go forward together - and work constructively together on the great challenges which now face the international order in the new century.


It is important that the British Prime Minister has convened this conference.
It is important that you as women and men of good mind and good heart have come to this conference.
It is important because billions of working people around the world  -  including among them the least powerful in the world  -  actively depend on the success of the political project for which we stand.
The project for which we stand is a good project.
The values for which we stand are good values.
Because we are so bold as to believe that the betterment of humankind is not the stuff of ideal dreams  -  but instead is the stuff of concrete political action.
We should have absolute confidence in the central organising principle of our project: that the advancement of open economies and the advancement of human decency are not irreconcilable propositions.
These are in fact mutually reinforcing propositions as  -  complementary pathways to positive human freedom.
Ours is always a more difficult political task than the conservatives:
     * Because at base their proposition is that the beginning and end of government is the maintenance of free markets;
     * that human dignity can only be obtained through the agency of those markets;
     * and that any concern for those who have no dignity should be through the agency of private philanthropy rather than concerted public policy.
We by contrast stand for open markets  -  while having a clear-cut recognition of when markets fail.
A clear-cut definition of public goods  -  a definition that includes:
     * the security of our peoples;
     * the proper and impartial regulation of our markets;
     * the provision of universal education, of universal health;
     * the provision of a humane safety net; and
     * the proper protection of the planet as the self-evident commons of our collective humanity.
And also a clear-cut definition of our responsibility to ensure all are included in the opportunities our polities, economies and societies provide: in other words that we are in the continuing business of challenging the limitations placed on people's potential by the circumstances they inherit.
Or as David Miliband has said: progressive governments should always see themselves as insurgents  -  never as incumbents.
In other words, that an essential part of the DNA of progressive politics is our rolling assault against endemic social and economic exclusion at home and abroad.
That, of course, is the other element of our political project: we are at heart internationalists.
The values for which we stand do not mysteriously stop at our national borders or in Australia's case, the continental shelf.
We hold these values of security, freedom, fairness and the preservation of the planet to be both self-evident and universal.
That is why I am an enormous admirer of the leadership Gordon Brown has provided the world on two of the great projects of our time:
     * The war on global poverty;
     * And acting with urgency on the great moral and economic challenge that is climate change.
The Prime Minister's contribution on these two great questions over much of the last decade has been global progressive politics at its best.
Just as your collective presence here today at this conference is also global progressive politics at its best.
Because, at our absolute best, we are a movement of hard heads and soft hearts.
The Contestability of Ideas  -  a battle cry for progressive politics
Not only should we be absolutely confident of the values for which we stand.
We should be equally confident in the ideas we advance.
And in the politics we prosecute.
We must always join the intellectual debate against our ideological opponents  -  and we must prevail.
We must engage in the academy.
We must engage in the community.
We must engage in public policy.
We must engage in the brutal business of party politics.
We must engage in the media.
That, once again, is why I would like to acknowledge the Prime Minister's leadership in revitalising the Progressive Policy Network through this conference.
We are, by instinct and by intellectual inclination, a movement that is passionate about the debate of ideas.
I want to say to you today that the new Australian Government which I lead is well and truly open for business when it comes to the ideas debate.
No-one has a monopoly of wisdom in this domain.
That's why in mid-April I will convene an Australia 2020 Summit.
The Summit brings to the national capital our best and brightest minds in search of the best ideas for the country in ten key areas:
     * The Productivity Agenda - education, skills, training, science and innovation;
     * The future of national infrastructure;
     * The challenges of population, sustainability, climate change and water;
     * Future directions for rural industries and rural communities;
     * A long-term national health strategy  -  including the challenges of preventative health, workforce planning and the ageing population;
     * Strengthening communities, supporting families and social inclusion;
     * The future of Indigenous Australia;
     * The future of the arts, film and creative design;
     * The future of Australian governance, including renewed democracy, a more open government, the structure of our Federation and the rights and responsibilities of citizens; and
     * Australia's future security and prosperity in a rapidly changing region and world.
I have appointed a non-government panel of ten leading Australians to in turn select a thousand of our brightest and best  -  100 per challenge area  -  to spend a weekend speaking to government rather than government speaking at them.
So in this spirit, if any of you at this conference have policy ideas, proposals or submissions you would like us to consider, then the invitation is real: send them to my office.
We will respond in time to all of them.
I say again, when it comes to ideas and innovation, Australia is now very much open for business.
The New Australian Government
The new Australian Government is pro-market, pro-business and pro-globalisation.
The new Australian Government is also implementing a fairness agenda aimed at maximising equality of opportunity for every individual to pursue their life opportunities to the fullest  -  as well as providing a proper safety net for all without undermining individual incentive.
At the same time we are also re-engaging the international order with a view to making our own contribution to the great challenges that confront our region and the world.
We have been in office for only four months today  -  but we've been busy:
     * On our first day in office, the Government ratified the Kyoto Protocol and we are now active participants in the Bali Roadmap on climate change;
     * On the first sitting day of our parliament, I extended an apology to the stolen generations of Indigenous Australians, and have begun a policy program of closing the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous life opportunities in Australia;
     * The Government also has commissioned its first White Paper on homelessness and is looking at how to invest in compassionate, pro-market solutions which deal with this gaping social challenge;
     * The Government has concluded an historic agreement with the state and territory governments of Australia to establish a single national authority to manage Australia's major inland river system  -  the Murray-Darling  -  whose future is threatened by the impact of over use and climate change;
     * The Government has also embraced a comprehensive productivity agenda based on a radical re-investment in education, skills, training, research, innovation and infrastructure  -  not just to provide the best platform for growth for the 21st century but also the best platform for opportunity: our objective is clear  -  to build in Australia the best educated, best skilled, best trained workforce in the world;
     * And the Government has also just enacted legislation to put in place a fair and flexible workplace relations system  -  one that balances flexibility for employers with protection of workers' rights and entitlements.
     * Furthermore, on the question of Indigenous policy, I have decided that each year in Australia's Federal Parliament the first working day will be marked by a Prime Ministerial statement reporting on progress in closing the life expectancy gap, progress in closing the gap on infant mortality and mortality of children up to five, and progress on closing the literacy and numeracy gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.
    Each year we must know as a Government, as a people, and as a country if we have made progress closing this gap.
    We should not underestimate the size of this challenge. 
    Many Governments with the best of intentions have failed in their attempts in the past. 
    But the time has come for the debate to move on from intentions and focus on outcomes, because in this endeavour outcomes are what really matters.
    This annual statement will greatly increase pressure on my Government to make progress towards closing the gap.  That is exactly why I am announcing it.
    There is no reason that in Australia today, a successful developed nation with a modern and prosperous economy, there should exist a 17 year life expectancy gap between Indigenous and non Indigenous Australians.
Internationally the Government has been active in re-engaging the United Nations (we have just announced our candidature for the UN Security Council after a 25 year absence); re-engaging Europe by developing a new Partnership Framework with Brussels across the breadth of the global agenda; and re-engaging our own region including through new forest agendas with Indonesia and Papua New Guinea and a determination to tackle the development deficit that now exists across the Pacific island states through our new proposal for Pacific Partnerships for Development.
Globally we will partner with the United Kingdom on the Millennium Development Goals given Australia's new commitment to increase official development assistance from 0.3 per cent of GNI to 0.5 per cent.
Just as globally we will now be working with the UK on climate change.
Australia's voice has been too quiet for too long in the councils of the world.
Instead Australia will now pursue an activist foreign policy in partnership with our allies, our region and the multilateral forums of the United Nations.
Future Agenda
The global, national and local agendas confronting progressive governments around the world are replete with challenges.
As a movement, we can turn in on ourselves  -  but protectionism in all its forms is the enemy of working peoples.
Or we can embrace the challenges of globalisation:
     * argue the case for openness;
     * celebrate the opportunities it provides for working peoples;
     * deal decisively with market failure where it occurs;
     * act compassionately, effectively and with dignity with those damaged by globalisation (and let us recognise there will always be some) so that they can participate afresh;
     * foster a dynamic culture of innovation across our societies and economies as the platforms for economic transformation for the future;
     * continue to reform our system of government and government service, so that our citizens lie at the centre rather than the inflexible behemoths of official bureaucracy;
     * and work in partnership with others to reform our institutions of global governance  -  particularly given the new challenges facing the UN, the Bretton Woods machinery and global financial markets.
Progressive politics must always embrace the future, not retreat to the insularity of the past, to forge a new politics of the centre that embraces both the empowerment of peoples through open economies and the opportunities created for people through the agency of a compassionate state.
The challenges we face are great.
But the narrative we have to offer is good  -  tempered by the experience of government, but always tested by the innovation of those beyond government.
And over the year ahead, I look forward to working with you in writing the next chapter of progressive politics and policy.


More than one million Australians were born in the United Kingdom.
Six million Australians have British ancestry.
And if you add together those with Irish ancestry you account for 8 million Australians.
I am one of them.
My father's forebears came from the United Kingdom.
Two of them were lucky enough have their passage to Australia paid for by His Majesty's Government  -  they were transported to Australia on the Second Fleet that arrived in Botany Bay in 1790.
In fact, one of them liked Australia so much that having completed his first tour of the colony and returned to London, he proceeded to re-offend and received seven further years transportation again.
It is a rare, if not unique, distinction to have been transported to New South Wales twice before deciding to go straight!
But the relationship between Australia and the United Kingdom goes beyond our ancestral interests, however colourful.
We have an evolving relationship based on shared values that continues to strengthen over time.
Over the years, Australians and Britons have fought side by side to protect and defend those shared values.
Earlier today, just before coming to this function I visited the Australian War memorial at Hyde Park Corner and laid a wreath.
The memorial commemorates the theatres in which Australians and Britons have fought together.
It is a powerful reminder of who and what we are.
So it is a great pleasure to be here today to talk to British industry and to members of the Australian business community here in London.
The commercial partnerships between our two nations are a crucial component of our modern relationship and important to our future prosperity.
I know that the Confederation of British Industry  -  representing as it does 200,000 businesses  -  calls itself the "voice of business".
Today, however, I would ask you, first, to lend me your ears.
I would like to outline for you the new Australian Government's vision for the future  -  the future of Australia and the future of our relationship with Great Britain.
My central point is simple  -  in a globalised world there are great economic synergies between Australia and Britain.
Great economic synergies that we can exploit to make our countries more prosperous and deliver a better standard of living for our citizens.
A Vision for Modern Australia
The new Australian Government is committed to building an Australia capable of meeting the challenges of the 21st century.
That means having a modern, competitive economy.
It also means a modern Australia where everybody gets a fair go.
And that includes Indigenous Australians.
On 13 February I presented an apology in parliament to those Indigenous Australians who had been taken from their families in the past.
On behalf of the Government and the parliament I said "sorry".
The apology was part of a new beginning.
I believe that old approaches are not working and we need to close the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.
I thought the apology was an important step to take  -  a step towards healing the hurt and a step towards a better future for Indigenous Australians. 
In a modern and prosperous Australia, there should be no reason for these gaps to exist.
In a prosperous Australia all people should have the opportunity to build a better life for themselves.
The Government's first White Paper will be on homelessness, because we believe it is unacceptable that people in modern Australia cannot put a roof over their heads.
A Vision for Australia's Economy
We also want to build a modern Australian economy capable of meeting the challenges of the 21st century.
The Australian Government is unapologetically pro-business and pro-market.
To build a modern economy, we need to lift productivity. 
Building a modern, competitive Australia capable of meeting the challenges of the 21st century will require us developing policy frameworks to maximise Australia's global economic competitiveness in an increasingly competitive - and now, increasingly unpredictable world.
We will still exploit our comparative advantages in exporting energy, resources and raw materials.
But we also need new industries that can develop on the foundation of a strong skills base, the right infrastructure and the right policy environment.
We see a role for government as an enabler of business, not as a director.
The economic program of the new Government involves three building blocks.
Stability and Responsible Economic Management
The first is stability in macroeconomic management. This is achieved through a prudent fiscal policy and a central bank with independent carriage of monetary policy.
That is why we have increased the independence of the Reserve Bank of Australia.
That it is why we will deliver a sound budget surplus in May.
That is why we are deploying all the tools of economic policy to keep downwards pressure on inflation.
Providing Critical Inputs: Education and Infrastructure
Second, beyond stability, the Government's role is to ensure the provision of critical inputs for a modern economy.
The government must ensure the provision of high quality education, training, and infrastructure.
That is why we have a plan to build the productive capacity of the Australian economy.
This plan starts with education.
People are the greatest economic resource of our nation.
Australia needs nothing less than a revolution in education  -  a substantial and sustained increase in the quantity of our investment, and the quality of our education.
Education has also evolved into a crucial export sector for the economy.
Last year over 450,000 international students were studying in Australia. 
Education is our largest services export.  It was worth more than 11 billion dollars last year.
Alongside education, the Government's other key priority for expanding Australia's productive capacity is infrastructure.
Inadequate infrastructure is a handbrake on growth.
That is why the new Government has already appointed a Minister for Infrastructure and created an advisory body, Infrastructure Australia, led by former airline chief and infrastructure specialist, Sir Rod Eddington.
They will look at Australia's current infrastructure bottlenecks, as well as our needs for the future and develop an infrastructure priority list for the nation.
We will work together with Australian state governments to build on world's best practice instruments, including public-private partnerships, to enable private companies to finance, design, construct, operate and maintain innovative infrastructure to deliver public goods.
Creating a Favourable Business Climate: Deregulation, Competition, Federalism
The third building block for a modern economy is a favourable business climate.
We must assist enterprise through a regulatory system that encourages competition and innovation.
We must reward work and success.
That is why the government has an agenda for reform of the federation, including a plan for business deregulation.
In partnership with state governments we have identified 27 areas for deregulation and red tape reduction to improve efficiency and reduce the regulatory burden on the economy.
The new Australian Government is embarking on an ambitious reform agenda because we are determined to build a secure future for Australia.
We need to prepare Australia for the challenges and opportunities of the 21st Century.
The greatest moral and economic challenge we will face in the 21st century is climate change.
Australia's ratification of the Kyoto Protocol underlines the fact that we are ready to take the actions required to address climate change globally.
We also need the right domestic policies -  such as emissions trading schemes and policies to promote energy efficiency. 
Implementing an emissions trading scheme is at the heart of our domestic policy agenda.
Australia and the United Kingdom have a lot to gain from more frequent dialogue, information sharing and exchange of expertise on carbon markets.
And the business sector is an important part of this.
Properly functioning carbon markets will require companies that develop expertise in trading carbon.
It will be a new business opportunity, as the growth of the carbon market here in London has shown.
It makes the point that our responses to climate change can also generate commercial opportunities.
A Vision for Australia's Place in the World
The Australian Government is committed to engaging with the world because many of the challenges we will face this century will require global responses  -  like climate change.
There are three pillars to Australia's foreign policy:
     * our alliance with the United States  -  the bedrock of our strategic policy;
     * our membership of the United Nations  -  where we cooperate with partners around the world to meet common challenges; and
     * our policy of comprehensive engagement with the Asia-Pacific region.
We will pursue our interests and make a contribution to the community of nations through what I call "creative middle power diplomacy".
For too long, Australia's voice has been too quiet in the councils of the world.
It is time for that to change.
Australia in the 21st Century Global Economy
The Australian Government is proud of the achievements of Australian businesses abroad.
The great American politician and jurist, Earl Warren, said that when he opened the newspaper he preferred to read the sports page first, because those pages record people's achievements.
Whereas the front pages record nothing but people's failures.
Earl Warren did not make mention of the business pages  -  but if you open an international newspaper today, you are as likely to find a successful Australian corporation on the world's business pages, as you are an Australian swimming champion on the sports pages.
Australian businesses have found themselves well positioned to take advantage of the opportunities afforded by the economy of the 21st Century.
The internationalisation of our economy in the 1980s and early 1990s opened Australia up to global markets, just as the economies in the Asia Pacific region began to grow rapidly.
In the last decade, the rise of China and India combined with the continuing strength of Japan and Korea has brought the broader Asian regional economy more sharply into focus.
Australia is well placed to benefit from the success of this region.
The liberalisation and internationalisation of the Chinese and Indian economies is in the process of adding two billion new people to the global market economy.
That is also two billion consumers who, as their incomes grow, demand increasing quantities of protein rich foods, energy, telecommunications, entertainment, and other services.
That is also two billion savers whose high saving rates have contributed to the growth in global savings and, at least until recently, widely available credit.
And hundreds of millions of new workers who can supply  -  at remarkably low cost  -  a significant proportion of the world's demand for textiles, electronics and other manufactured goods.
The extraordinary growth of the emerging economies in the Asia Pacific region underpins the new Government's commitment to comprehensive engagement with our region as a key element of Australia's foreign and economic policy.
For Australia, closer engagement with Asia does not mean less engagement with Europe or less attention to our European relationships.
It actually means a modern and different relationship with Europe.
This is born out by the statistics on trade and investment.
Japan has been Australia's largest export market for 40 years.
China is now our largest trading partner.
But at the same time Europe, taken as a whole, remains by far the largest investor in Australia, contributing more than 30 per cent of our stock of foreign investment.
As Australia forges ever more successfully into Asian markets, so European companies become more interested in investing in Australia as a platform for their operations in the Asian region.
Rather than having to make some arbitrary and unnecessary choice between economic relationships with Europe or Asia; we are finding that these relationships are inherently important and mutually reinforcing.
Australia has a unique opportunity to capitalise on our position as an advanced industrial economy located amid the rapidly developing economies of Asia.
To maximise that opportunity for Australia, we must work hard to enhance our natural comparative advantages.
Our goal in this regard is simple: it is to make Australia the best place to do business in the East Asian hemisphere.
We want to ensure that we have the right policy-settings in place so that Australian businesses thrive.
So that we can export more.
And continue to attract investment from abroad.
That is why, for example, we made an election commitment to cut in half the 30 per cent withholding tax on distributions from Australian managed funds to non-resident investors. 
This was a pledge I first made back in 2006.
And it is a commitment we will be honouring.
Reducing the withholding tax to 15 per cent helps Australian fund managers can compete on the world stage in managing the global pool of funds by more closely aligning Australia's withholding tax rate with those in other countries. 
And, once we implement this reform, I want to signal today that we want to remain more than competitive with the rest of the world.
These reforms build on the existing strengths of the industry in Australia.
Australia's financial sector has one of the soundest regulatory frameworks in the world.
It also has the advantage of lying in the same time zone as the East Asian hemisphere. 
Australia has strong institutional (and, increasingly, linguistic) linkages to financial markets across our region.
More and more Australian professionals are capable of operating in the principal languages of Asia.
Our industry is substantial.
It is the fourth-largest in the world with $1.3 trillion under management  -  a result of the superannuation policy reforms of the 1990s by the previous Labor Government.
And it is one we are determined to grow into a major export industry for Australia.
Australian Financial Markets
Reforming the withholding tax regime is a key part of the Australian Government's plan to ensure that our finance sector continues to grow and flourish.
A globally competitive tax regime turbo-charges investors' interest.
This objective has become even more important in the context of recent turmoil on global financial markets.
In the news in recent months we have seen, over and over again, the pain being felt by financial institutions.
What we don't see as much is the impact that this has on families. For example, let me tell you a little about Australia.
Australians have a higher proportion of direct share ownership than other industrialised countries.
Approximately 7.3 million people or 46 per cent of the Australian adult population owns shares either directly or indirectly via a managed fund or self managed superannuation fund. 
Of this, approximately 6 million or 38 per cent of the Australian adult population hold direct investments.
And nearly all working families have exposure to the share market through their superannuation. 
The high level of participation in Australia is underpinned by a high level of public confidence in Australia's financial authorities. 
This confidence also underpins the high level of foreign participation in Australia's equity markets.
As a capital importing nation, Australia's future economic prosperity depends upon our ability to attract stable, long term investment from abroad into domestic equity markets.
I am determined to ensure that the Australian regulatory framework remains at the cutting edge of financial developments to ensure an efficient, competitive and informed market.
We need to be constantly vigilant to ensure that our regulation keeps pace with the most recent financial market developments.
One of the recent developments in financial markets relates to the recent growth of financial instruments  -  including equity derivatives such as Contracts for Difference and Swaps.
I note that in the UK, the Contract for Difference market has grown significantly in recent years and that estimates by the Financial Services Authority suggest that 30 per cent of equity trades are in some way driven by Contract for Difference transactions.
Similarly in Australia we have witnessed substantial growth in equity derivative products.
Because the owners of these instruments only have indirect economic ownership over the underlying securities, these equity derivatives have enabled market participants, including speculators and hedge funds, to avoid the disclosure requirements associated with direct stakes.
As the UK Financial Services Authority has recently noted, the growing use of these instruments has raised concerns in the business community in the UK, and these concerns are mirrored in the investment community in Australia.
In particular, the lack of an appropriate disclosure framework covering equity derivatives has:
     * reduced transparency of ownership changes and takeover moves;
     *  reduced the ability of companies to know who their effective owners are;
     *  enabled hedge funds to outflank traditional institutional investors by using economic interests to influence companies. 
Today I can announce that Australia intends to take a lead in increasing the transparency of its financial markets in this important area. 
We want to ensure that Australia's regulatory regime does not impose an undue burden on market participants or inappropriate barriers to foreign equity investment in the Australian market. 
Consequently, I have asked the Australian Treasury to review appropriate disclosure requirements for equity derivatives.
I know that the Financial Services Authority here in the UK has recently been working on this area. 
We have been following their work with interest and we are keen to ensure that the lines of communication between our agencies are open.
Second, the government has been working to improve the disclosure regulations covering short selling.
The recent volatility in stock markets has been exacerbated by the lack of transparency surrounding the increasingly prevalent practice of short selling.
It is in the interests of all investors to have greater transparency around these issues.
That is why the Government has also announced it will pursue legislative change to address the ambiguity around covered short selling and disclosure. 
In addition the Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA) is conducting a review of settlement risks in relation to short selling and stock lending. 
The third area of reform I want to discuss tonight involves Australia's participation in multilateral efforts to improve financial market stability.
The British Government has highlighted the need for:
     * strengthened cooperation and coordination of the Financial Stability Forum and the International Monetary Fund  -  the key bodies for monitoring international financial and economic stability issues;
     *  The right structures to be in place for identifying weaknesses and vulnerabilities in the global financial system; and
     *  National authorities to take action when warnings are given.
As financial markets become more global and assets are traded more quickly between nations, so too must regulation and supervision become more global.
The Australian Treasurer will be taking the Australian Government's program for addressing the global financial turbulence to the IMF Spring Meetings in Washington next week.
We will work with other economies to improve international risk management systems by examining initiatives to:
     * Strengthen the coordinating mechanisms for providing international surveillance of all countries' financial systems and for identifying systemic risks to the global financial markets, including more systematic cross border supervisory cooperation in the oversight of large global financial institutions;
     * Improve coordination of the international work being undertaken by the key bodies responsible for global financial stability issues  -  including the IMF and the FSF; and
     * Strengthen global standards on transparency, disclosure and valuation practices.
Our purpose in pursuing these domestic and international initiatives is to ensure that Australia continues to have one of the most advanced financial services regulatory frameworks in the world.
We intend to work closely with our friends in Britain's regulatory authorities to cooperate where appropriate and learn from each others experiences.
And we intend to work internationally on these areas through: 
     * the IMF;
     * the G20 Study Group on Global Credit Market Disruptions, which Australia chairs; and
     * the Financial Stability Forum, which met last week in Rome and said it would soon make recommendations to the G7 on a range of concrete policy responses relating to: prudential oversight of capital, liquidity and risk management; transparency, disclosure and valuation practices; the role and uses of credit ratings; authorities' responsiveness to risks, and arrangements to deal with stress in the financial system.
We have a big task ahead of us  -  we want to build an Australian economy that will be increasingly globally competitive in the highly globalised 21st century.
We will do that by making sure that we create the right environment for business by building a highly-skilled work force, developing world-leading infrastructure and pushing ahead with deregulation.
If we want to be able to make the most of economic opportunities, we have to be outward looking.
The opening line of Rudyard Kipling's poem, the Ballad of East and West reads "Oh East is east, and West is west, and never the twain shall meet."
Well, in the world today, the old divisions of East and West are becoming blurred.
...
[Message clipped]


It is an honour for an Australian Prime Minister to come to speak at the London School of Economics, an institution with such a remarkable history.
When the LSE was founded in 1895 by Sidney and Beatrice Webb, Graham Wallas and George Bernard Shaw, its goal was the bettering of society through research into poverty and inequality.
The Social-Democratic response to these great social challenges has rightly changed over time  -  but the relevance of these challenges in themselves has not.
It has surely exceeded even their lofty vision.
Through its doors have passed fifteen Nobel Prize winners, forty-two heads of government and heads of state (including John F. Kennedy, Clement Attlee and Romano Prodi) as well as many leaders in business, academia and law.
One of the most famous Australian LSE graduates was Herbert Cole Coombs (affectionately known back home as “Nugget”) who took his PhD from the LSE in 1933.
Nugget Coombs is remembered as one of the greatest public servants in Australian history, serving as the first Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, helping to establish the Australian National University (my own university) and championing the interests of Australia's indigenous people.
Many of Australia's most talented students continue to come to LSE and this institution continues to strengthen the bonds between Australia and the United Kingdom into a new century.
Another part of the deep bonds between our nations is of course our shared roles in the conflicts of the 20th century.
On Friday when I arrived in London, the first official event on my program was to visit the Australian War Memorial at Hyde Park corner and lay a wreath.
That memorial commemorates the Australian servicemen and women who fought alongside Britons in two World Wars.
The memorial says a lot about who we are and where we have come from.
Australia and the United Kingdom have always been the closest of allies.
In two World Wars, Australians and Britons, fought side by side in theatres of battle right around the globe.
In Europe and the Atlantic.
In Asia and the Pacific.
And we did so in the name of the values that we still hold dear: values of freedom; values of fairness; values which cause us instinctively to seek wherever we can to defend the weak from the strong.
Our histories have been intertwined since the 18th century.
Australia's modern political and legal system is built on the foundation of British philosophical and institutional traditions that we have inherited.
And these are good traditions.
But today I do not want to talk about our shared history.
I want to talk instead about our shared future.
I want to talk about how Australia and the United Kingdom can work creatively together to shape the future global order.
On security.
On global economic management.
On economic development for the poorest nation states.
And on climate change.
Australia in a changing world
The time has passed when countries  -  including those with close ties like ours  -  can talk about their bilateral relationships as though they take place in some sort of vacuum.
In today's world, we are all deeply connected to each other within an increasingly inter-connected global order.
This complexity is compounded by the fact that in this age of the globalisation of security, the economy and the environment, we are also witnessing the collapse of what the international relations scholars have described as “the great divide”  -  between what was once clinically described as the “foreign” and the “domestic”; the “internal” and the “external”; the “national” and the “international”.
All governments are increasingly operating in a seamless policy space where better coordination and cooperation within and between states has become more important than ever.
The new Australian Government's mission is to build a modern Australia that is capable of meeting the challenges of the 21st Century.
That means we have to be strong at home and fully engaged abroad.
We are committed to strong macro-economic management  -  critical in an increasingly fragile global economy.
We are committed to investing strongly in productivity  -  we need nothing less than an education revolution to make sure that our people have the skills and training to compete in the fiercely competitive global economy of tomorrow.
We are committed to building 21st century infrastructure  -  both transport infrastructure and the infrastructure of the future like high-speed broadband.
And we are committed to building an inclusive Australia  -  where the benefits of prosperity are open to the many, not the few.
Australia is already deeply integrated with the global economy.
It is now a quarter of a century since the election of the Hawke Labor Government that pioneered extensive economic reforms that internationalised the Australian economy.
Australia's economy is worth around USD$1 trillion and we are a member of the G20 group of large economies.
Our international trade in goods and services is equal to around 40 per cent of GDP.
Our major export markets are in Asia.
Our major foreign investors are the United States, the United Kingdom and Japan.
Our major investment destinations are those same three countries and New Zealand.
In short, Australia is a full participant in globalisation and we recognise that as a beneficiary of globalisation, we also have to maintain, support and enhance the global economic order  -  and the political and security order that underpins it.
To do so, the new Australian Government will prosecute what I call “creative middle power diplomacy”.
That means we will use our assets, strengths and networks and work with our partners to find solutions to global and regional challenges.
We will approach our task based on the three pillars of the foreign policy of the new Australian Government:
     * our alliance with the United States;
     * our membership of the United Nations  -  where we work with partners from around the world, including our partners in Europe; and
     * our comprehensive engagement with Asia and the Pacific.
What sort of international order do we want for the 21st century?
Today I want to argue that, in a rapidly changing world, Australia and the United Kingdom have a lot to gain from working with each other to shape the emerging global order  -  particularly given Britain's strength in Europe and Australia's standing in Asia.
Both of us are long-standing allies of the United States.
And we are both deeply engaged in the other two major regions of the current global order  -  Europe and the Asia-Pacific region.
And in Australia's case we pride ourselves on being the most Asia-literate country in the collective West.
For the UK and Australia, this is not a bad set of strengths to bring to the table as countries seeking to contribute to the shaping of the global order.
Furthermore, we actually get on with each other (at least outside the legitimate and visceral hostilities of cricket where, very simply, we are good, and you are not so good, and the loss of The Ashes is as unjust as the loss of the Elgin Marbles).
The open global architecture pioneered by the United States and its allies in the aftermath of World War II has led to remarkable economic growth.
But there are challenges aplenty ahead.
     * Enhancing the global security order by acting decisively and pro-actively on terrorism;
     * Reforming UN multilateralism;
     * Restoring stability to global financial markets;
     * Making progress on trade liberalisation;
     * Delivering on the global undertaking to make poverty history by making sure that the benefits of globalisation are spread more evenly around the world.
     * Enhancing human rights and not ignoring them  -  even when it is politically difficult, as is currently the case with China over Tibet.
     * And, in addition to all these great challenges to the global order, we must build a co-ordinated response to climate change  -  the great moral, economic and environmental challenge of our age.
Australia and the United Kingdom shaping the world order
Australia and the United Kingdom can do a great deal to advance a shared vision for the future.
Counter-terrorism
For instance on security.
We both have a stake in global security.
That gives us reason to work together on terrorism  -  not just closely, but with absolute intimacy.
Terrorism remains a threat to Australia, just as it does to the United Kingdom.
Part of our response must be domestic  -  police and intelligence agencies need the powers and resources to identify terrorist threats.
They must do so in a way that is consistent with our laws and values.
But terrorism is not local.
Terrorism is a global phenomenon that exploits the openness of the international system to build its organisations and to plan its attacks.
Cooperation across borders between our government agencies is a crucial element of our response.
We can achieve a lot by sharing expertise on counter-terrorism across borders.
For Australia, working closely with our colleagues and partners in South-East Asia is critical.
Institutions like the Jakarta Centre for Law Enforcement Cooperation build practical expertise  -  and Australia and the UK both support its work.
We also work together in Afghanistan.
We are both committed to supporting Afghanistan in the long-term.
Last week I attended the Bucharest Summit of NATO leaders to discuss Afghanistan.
Australia is the largest non-NATO contributor to troops in that country.
More than 1,000 Australian service men and women are there, largely in the dangerous south of the country, as is the United Kingdom.
They are putting their lives on the line.
We worked together in the run-up to the Bucharest conference to deliver a workable plan for Afghanistan's future.
A plan that integrates the civil and the military components of our strategy.
A plan capable of delivering a better future for the people of Afghanistan  -  and a better strategy to frustrate Al Qaeda's efforts to make Afghanistan a renewed base for terrorist activity that threatens us all.
And beyond these classical counter-terrorism measures, to work together on reducing the grounds that foment terrorism in the first place  -  investing in education in the Islamic world as well as acting together on a comprehensive Middle East peace process.
Climate Change
When I met with Gordon Brown this morning, we discussed the security implications of climate change.
Climate change will aggravate existing strains and create new tensions within and between states as the supply of natural resources, including food and water, becomes increasingly unpredictable.
Climate change is not just an environmental, economic and moral challenge.
It is also a security challenge.
Australia wants to be part of the global solution, not just the problem.
The first act of the new Australian Government was signing the papers to ratify the Kyoto Protocol.
We will continue to work constructively in the international arena.
And we see the United Kingdom as a key partner in this.
That is why I was pleased to announce with Prime Minister Brown today a new enhanced partnership between our countries - with climate change at its heart.
We share a vision for an ambitious, equitable, environmentally effective, economically responsible post-2012 global agreement on climate change and will work together to this end  -  drawing on our complementary regional and global relationships.
We will also collaborate in specific areas aimed at building a global low carbon economy together with effective adaptation to climate change:
     * Collaborating on clean energy technology research and the deployment of energy efficiency, renewable energy and carbon capture and storage technologies.
     * Developing climate models that bring together the work of UK and Australian climate scientists.
     * Sharing information and expertise on emissions trading  -  which is why I also announced today that Australia will join the International Climate Action Partnership.
If we are going to reach an effective global response we will need an ambitious long term global target, supported by carbon markets that help drive investment in clean technologies.
Technology must be a big part of the solution.
Australia is the world's largest exporter of coal. For us, finding a technological solution to carbon emissions from coal-fired power stations is crucially important.
Work on these technologies is moving ahead. Last week in Australia we opened our first carbon sequestration pilot plant.
Australia, the United Kingdom, the United States, China and other countries like Norway must work more closely together on translating this technology into an effective commercial reality.
Technology is crucial to achieving cuts in emissions.
So too is action on energy efficiency.
As is action on deforestation, re-afforestation and avoided deforestation in countries with major rainforest cover  -  as Britain is doing in partnership in the Congo and as Australia is now doing with Indonesia and Papua New Guinea.
The transition to a global low carbon economy will provide new jobs, new industries and new growth for the future  -  although structural adjustment will be necessary for all countries.
Consistent with our international approach, we are also committed to tackling climate change in Australia.
We have committed to a target of a 60 per cent reduction of emissions based on 2000 levels by 2050. And we will develop interim targets in the year or so ahead.
We are working to establish a mandatory cap and trade emissions trading scheme by 2010.
And by 2020, 20 per cent of Australia's power generation will be sourced from renewable energy sources such as solar and wind power.
Again, in the lead-up to Copenhagen, the United Kingdom and Australia will be working together towards a global consensus on climate change.
Development
Australia and the United Kingdom can also work more closely together on the global development challenge.
Today I announced that Australia would be signing on to Prime Minister Brown's Millennium Development Goals (MDG) Call to Action.
We support its aim of working for accelerated progress towards the MDGs.
We want to work together on important issues like reducing maternal deaths.
It is deeply disturbing that still in 2008, every minute a woman dies in pregnancy or childbirth.
We are committed to cooperating to achieve demonstrable reductions in maternal mortality.
The Millennium Development Goals must be achieved by 2015.
Already, at the half-way mark, progress in some countries is mixed at best, and in some cases downright disappointing.
When I visited Papua New Guinea recently, I announced that Australia would place the Millennium Development Goals at the centre of its development assistance to the Pacific Island nations through our proposed Pacific Partnerships for Development.
Australia will also work closely with the United Kingdom in the lead up to the UN special conference on the Millennium Development Goals in September.
These two challenges  -  climate change and development  -  are closely linked.
Climate change is already making it more difficult to achieve the goals of poverty eradication and sustainable development.
The World Bank estimates that 20-40 per cent of all overseas development assistance is at risk from global warming.
Therefore the development challenge will require effective integration with the climate change challenge, both in reducing emissions and adapting to the impacts of climate change.
It will also require greater effort - which is why Australia has now embarked on a program to lift its official development assistance (ODA) from 0.3 to 0.5 per cent of Gross National Income (GNI) by 2015.
Australia, Britain and the European Union should also work on better coordinating our development efforts among the Pacific Island countries.
Likewise, Australia intends to examine how we might modestly partner with Britain (and the Commonwealth) in defined development challenges in Africa.
Our efforts must be effective, long-term and global if we are serious about making poverty history.
International Financial Institutions
I am a firm believer in the role of international institutions.
Australia played a significant role in the founding of the United Nation some 60 years ago through our then Foreign Minister Bert Evatt.
Evatt sometimes riled his colleagues from the great powers, but he was recognised as a champion for the rights of smaller countries, a critical factor in building effective institutions.
International institutions help to build rules and norms of international behaviour.
The United Nations  -  and other global institutions  -  need to evolve and reform if they are to meet the challenges of the 21st century.
The structure of international institutions must reflect the realities of the modern world.
The Security Council needs to better reflect the world of the 21st century.
Australia supports Japan's and India's bids to become permanent members of the Security Council.
As a demonstration of our commitment to the United Nations, I announced in New York last week that Australia will seek a non-permanent seat on the Security Council in 2013-2014.
I am committed to boosting cooperation between Australia and the United Kingdom in the UN, including on questions of reform.
Australia and the UK can also work together to push for a successful outcome to the Doha Round of World Trade Organisation negotiations.
We are at a critical stage in the negotiations.
Negotiating texts will be out soon and Australia supports the idea of calling for early ministerial attention to the texts to concentrate peoples' minds and get an outcome on Doha.
Freeing up trade is too important to the world's economic future to let this chance pass.
We can also work together on reform of the international financial institutions  -  the IFIs.
The IMF should adopt at the end of this month a package of measures aimed at better aligning its members' quotas (or shareholdings) with their weight in the global economy.
Quotas are the main determinant of voting power in the IMF.
Emerging market economies will be the main beneficiaries.
Korea will see its quota double.
China's quota will increase by 50 per cent, and India's and Brazil's each by 40 per cent.
The reform package will provide for further adjustments for emerging markets in future years.
Prior to the reforms, China's IMF voting share was less than the combined shares of Belgium and Switzerland!
The package also contains important measures to increase the voice of low-income IMF members.
Australia can take some credit for these outcomes.
Some years ago we were among a handful of countries urging the need for quota reform to enhance the IMF's legitimacy and relevance, particularly among emerging market economies in our region.
In 2006, under Australia's chairmanship, the Group of 20 (G20) played an important role in the development of the first stage of the current reform package.
Australia has recognised that this is not a zero-sum game  -  that all IMF members will benefit from a Fund that has greater legitimacy and relevance, and is therefore more effective in fulfilling its vital mandate for international financial stability.
Global Financial Markets
Reforming the IMF is important for the long term.
Dealing effectively with the current global financial crisis is of immediate importance.
The current crisis is significant in the overall context of the economic globalisation process we have all experienced over the last two decades.
Economic globalisation has been driven by three principal forces:
     * the liberalisation of global capital flows;
     * the liberalisation of global trade flows; and
     * the explosion of the new information communication technologies that have underpinned both.
These are the arteries of the globalisation process.
I've already spoken at length about the current challenges to the further liberalisation of global trade flows.
Progress is critical if we are to combat the forces of protectionism, and resolve trade disputes effectively.
The current global financial crisis goes to the imperative of sustaining the strong capital flows that have underpinned the global economy's strong growth in recent years.
We need to maintain a global regime that fosters open capital markets that allocates the world's saving to its most profitable uses, within frameworks of supervision and regulation that maintain confidence in the system.
Of course there are different views on the current financial crisis, and whether it represents a significant market failure or simply a market-based re-pricing of risk.
Either way, the crisis has highlighted the challenge of ensuring that regulatory frameworks keep up with the innovations in financial instruments.
In Australia we have found during the credit turmoil that our regulatory framework is doing its job.
I was pleased to see Sir Howard Davies in a recent Financial Times opinion piece rightly drew the connection between the Australian “twin peaks” regulatory model, and the proposed reform of the regulatory arrangements in the United States.
I don't know whether I would go so far as to agree with Sir Howard's view that the “US Treasury has come to rest near Sydney Harbour”, but I can say that our regulatory arrangements are working well.
This is not to say that our regulatory system can't be improved.
The current turbulence has exposed a number of gaps gaps, which we have announced we will fill.
It has of course also exposed gaps in the international network of surveillance and regulation, which we want to see remedied.
There is a parallel between the oversight of global financial markets and global trade  -  in that effective globalisation in both cases requires effective regulatory regimes that can sustain and, in the event of crisis, restore confidence.
As I said at the Progressive Governance Conference here in London last Friday, modern social democrats believe in open markets; but they also believe in the effective regulation of those markets  -  we are very much the party of intelligent regulation.
The challenge we all face now (Australia and the UK included) is to ensure we get the balance right between market freedom and market regulation.
We should not over-react to recent events, but equally we need to address the problems that have been exposed.
Further, we must coordinate our response to the financial crisis.
Australia and the UK are both members of the Financial Stability Forum and we are contributing significantly to the development of new regulatory approaches to global financial markets through the FSF.
And will continue to do so at the upcoming meetings of the IMF this week in Washington.
Once again the UK and Australia will need to collaborate closely on this work, focussing on matters of valuation, transparency and liquidity.
A key lesson from all of the market trauma of the last six months is that when it comes to something as fundamental as the integrity of financial markets, good rules are essential.
In fact, it is government's responsibility to make the rules which will ensure that open economies and open markets are able to continue to support economic globalisation.
Governments have a role in protecting the integrity, trust and functionality of markets.
We make no apology for now insisting that the rules be reviewed to increase the disclosure and transparency so that a sensible assessment of financial risks is possible.
I entitled my remarks tonight “Australia and the UK, global partners in shaping the future global order”.
The challenges to that order are as broad as they are deep.
Security, global financial markets, global trade, the Millennium Development Goals and climate change.
But what is remarkable about all these challenge areas, Australia and the UK exhibit an extraordinary similarity (if not universality) of interests.
Modern Australia and modern Britain both see ourselves as committed global citizens.
We are both strongly committed to contributing to the future global order.
And above all, both Australia and Britain are forces for good in the world  -  a world in which the number of national actors willing to play a significant global role remains limited.
I look forward very much therefore to building a new partnership with Britain in this, the third century of our bilateral relationship  -  one not just based on the strength of our bilateral relationship, but one based also on our common commitment to building a global order that meets the challenges of the 21st century  -  and one that helps all nations and all peoples, not just the few, to achieve their potential in the dynamic century that lies ahead.


I begin by congratulating Peking University which this year celebrates its 110th anniversary  -  making this university three years older than the Commonwealth of Australia.
Peking University is the most famous in China.
And it has played an important part in modern Chinese history.
In the early 20th century, when China was going through a period of rapid transformation, it was Peking University that led movements for a new era in Chinese educational, cultural and political life.
Peking University was at the centre of the May 4th Movement.
The May 4th era  -  for I realise that it was a transformative decade from 1917 to 1927  -  was one of crucial and lasting importance in the emergence of a modern China.
Many famous figures in this period were active at your university.
One thinks, for example, of Cai Yuanpei, Chen Duxiu, Hu Shi, Li Dazhao and Lu Xun.
This year, 2008, is the 90th anniversary of some key events of the May Fourth era:
 -  through his essays for the major magazine New Youth the writer and educator Hu Shi successfully advocated the use of modern vernacular Chinese in education and the media.
This helped bring about a major change in the way that the young people of China expressed themselves to their compatriots.
Also the writer Lu Xun published the first, and justifiably famous, story in modern Chinese, Diary of a Madman.
I would also note that Lu Xun's design for the school crest of Peking University is still in use.
Indeed, you, the students of Peking University today, are heirs to a great tradition of intellectual engagement with your country.
Studying China
This is not the first time I have visited Peking University.
But it is the first time I have given a speech here.
It is a great honour for me.
And it is a great honour for me to address the students of this university because you are an important part of China's future.
I first started studying China and the Chinese language in 1976.
It was a different China back then.
Zhou Enlai had just died.
Mao Zedong was still alive.
And the Cultural Revolution had not concluded  -  indeed our Chinese language textbooks were still full of class struggle.
Some have asked me why I decided to study Chinese.
I had grown up on a farm in rural Queensland where China seemed very remote.
I remember as a teenager following closely the visit of Australia's Prime Minister Gough Whitlam to China on television in 1973 after the Australia Labor Government recognised China in 1972.
I remember watching the footage of him meeting Mao Zedong and Deng Xiaoping escorting his party on a tour to the Great Wall.
That visit inspired my interest in this extraordinary country.
When I went to university I knew that I wanted to study China.
I went to the Australian National University in Canberra.
And for the next four years I studied Chinese language, Chinese history and Chinese literature together with Japanese and Korean history as well.
I even studied Chinese calligraphy, but my calligraphy was ugly then  -  and it is even uglier now.
Later I became a diplomat.
Because I was a graduate in Chinese, the then Australian Government decided to send me to Sweden  -  where in those days I could barely find a decent Chinese restaurant.
I eventually made it to China in 1984 when I started work at the Australian Embassy.
But I did not remain a diplomat.
I wanted to enter politics.
I was elected to Australia's Parliament in 1998 and after serving in parliament for nine years in opposition, my party won the general election last year and I had the honour of becoming 26th Prime Minister of Australia.
Australia and China
Some people think that Australia and China are new friends.
But in fact our history is already long.
Chinese settlers came to Australia first in the nineteenth century.
When gold was discovered in Victoria and Queensland in the 1850s, the first major group of Chinese migrants came to our shores.
We now have over 600,000 people who claim Chinese ancestry.
After English, Chinese (Mandarin and Cantonese) is the most widely spoken language in Australia.
The Chinese community has deep roots in Australia and is an important part of modern Australian society.
It includes people like Dr John Yu, one of Australia's leading surgeons and Australian of the Year in 1996.
And the young mathematician, Terrence Tao, who I met recently.
The flow of people has not all been in one direction.
Some Australians  -  though a smaller number  -  have made China their home.
George Morrison is one such person.
Morrison first came to China in 1894.
He lived here for 20 years.
In Australia, he was known as “Chinese Morrison”.
And here in Beijing, during the Republic of China, Wangfujing, home to George Morrison, was known as “Morrison Street”.
It is easy to see why people become fascinated with China.
China has thousands of years of continuous recorded history, but it is a country of constant change.
When I look at the China of 2008, I see a very different country to the one I studied in the late 1970s and the one I lived in during the mid 1980s.
China and the World
The changes in China since the 1970s have been remarkable.
And the change in China has led to a profound evolution in the relationship between our two countries.
China's policy change 30 years ago this year to “reform and open up” was the start of your country's re-connection with the world.
China's companies began trading with others.
China's people began to travel.
China's students began going overseas to study in greater numbers.
The world began to see China, and the people of China began to see the world, in new ways.
This institution, Peking University, through its teaching, research and search for knowledge has also had a profound influence on China's changes.
Its graduates have made a big contribution to your country's engagement with the world.
To many people in China, these changes bring a better and richer life.
People are able to make decisions about where they work, how they live and set their own goals.
They can build their own businesses.
At the same time, there are still many problems in China  -  problems of poverty, problems of uneven development, problems of pollution, problems of broader human rights.
It is also important to recognise that China's change is having a great impact not just on China, but also on the world.
The scale and pace of China's economic development and social transformation is unprecedented in human history.
Never before have so many people been brought into the global economy in such a short period of time.
Just look at some of the figures.
China is now the world's third-largest trading nation.
Its exports are growing at over 30 per cent per year.
GDP per capita has nearly doubled in the past five years.
People in Australia and around the world recognise that China's economic development is having a profound global impact.
They understand that China's demand for resources is driving global growth.
But China's growth can also cause anxiety.
Some people are concerned about their jobs moving to China.
When people overseas are faced with big changes and uncertainties like these they get nervous.
We all need to appreciate these anxieties and their origins.
Today I would like to make a suggestion.
I think that you  -  the young people of China, the generation that will see China's full integration into global society, the global economy and the overall global order  -  have an important role to play in the life of the world.
The global community looks forward to China fully participating in all the institutions of the global rules-based order, including in security, in the economy, in human rights, in the environment.
And we look forward to China making active contributions to the enhancement of that order in the future.
It is a necessary task of responsible global citizenship.
It is a big responsibility you have.
You are the product of China today.
And you are the representatives of China's tomorrow.
You will be the ones who define how the world sees China.
“Harmony” was the dream and hope of that great Chinese thinker and activist Kang Youwei.
The Hundred Days reform movement, like Peking University, also marks its 110th anniversary this year.
Kang proposed a utopian world free of political boundaries.
China has variously articulated its approach to development as one of “peaceful rise”, “peaceful development” or more recently that of a “harmonious world”.
In 2005 the then US Deputy Secretary of State Bob Zoellick spoke for his part of his concept that China would and could become a responsible global stakeholder.
As I said last week in a speech to the Brookings Institution in Washington, it is worthwhile thinking about how to encourage a synthesis of these concepts of a “harmonious world” and the “responsible stakeholder”.
The idea of a “harmonious world” depends on China being a participant in the world order and, along with others, acting in accordance with the rules of that order.
Failing this, “harmony” is impossible to achieve.
“Responsible stakeholder” contains the same idea at its core  -  China working to maintain and develop the global and regional rules-based order.
This year, as China hosts the Olympics, the eyes of the world will be on you and the city of Beijing.
It will be a chance for China to engage directly with the world, both on the sports field and on the streets of Beijing.
Some have called for a boycott of the Beijing Olympics because of recent problems in Tibet.
As I said in London on Sunday, I do not agree.
I believe the Olympics are important for China's continuing engagement with the world.
Australia like most other countries recognises China's sovereignty over Tibet.
But we also believe it is necessary to recognise there are significant human rights problem in Tibet.
The current situation in Tibet is of concern to Australians.
We recognise the need for all parties to avoid violence and find a solution through dialogue.
As a long-standing friend of China I intend to have a straightforward discussion with China's leaders on this.
We wish to see the year 2008 as one of harmony, and celebration  -  not one of conflict and contention.
Harmony in the Natural Environment
Our shared future is not only one about harmony between nations and peoples.
It is also about harmony with nature  -  the “Unity of Man and Nature”  -  a concept with ancient roots in Chinese thought.
We all share responsibility for the future.
One of the big future challenges for Australia and China is climate change.
Australia is committed to strong action domestically and internationally on climate change.
Because we know that climate change is the great moral, economic and environmental challenge of our time  -  one that all nations have to work together to overcome.
That's why climate change will be an important part of my discussions with the Chinese leadership this week.
It is important that China play an increasingly prominent role on climate change.
An effective global response to climate change will require the active participation of all major emitters.
I also believe it is important for China's own future.
Unless we are successful, China will face increasing pressure on its water supplies, changing rainfall patterns and rising sea levels.
A strong relationship, and a true friendship, are built on the ability to engage in direct, frank and ongoing dialogue about our fundamental interests and future vision.
In the modern, globalised world, we are all connected; connected not only by politics and economics, but also in the air we breathe.
A true friend is one who can be a “zhengyou”, that is a partner who sees beyond immediate benefit to the broader and firm basis for continuing, profound and sincere friendship.
In other words, a true friendship which “offers unflinching advice and counsels restraint” to engage in principled dialogue about matters of contention.
It is the kind of friendship that I know is treasured in China's political tradition.
It is the kind of friendship that I also offer China today.
A Conversation with China's Youth on the Future  - Mandarin Translation RTF 215KB | DOC 89KB | PDF 348KB


Thanks very much, Robert, for those very kind and welcoming remarks and welcome to all of you here today for this important part of our 2020 Summit process.
We do have Ministers here from the Government and I thank them for participating. We have Peter Garrett, we also have Chris Bowen, do I see Jenny Macklin back there? I do see Jenny Macklin. I think I have Parliamentary Secretaries in the form of Maxine McKew and I've got Tanya Plibersek there as a Minister, I've got Nicola Roxon here, and I've also got other Parliamentary Secretaries, I've got Mark Dreyfus here. Anyone else I've missed on the Ministerial side? I can't see that someone is pointing to before I go to non-politics  -  non active politics, I should say.
And then, we have so many people from beyond the political sphere who are assisting us in pulling this 2020 Summit together. We have, of course, Glyn Davis from the University of Melbourne. I'd just like to thank him in particular for his sterling effort in trying to harmonise this exercise. The Chinese talk about the doctrine of the great harmony, this has been a challenge to the doctrine of the great harmony to ensure that both in the events leading up to, and in the Summit next weekend, where we have a gathering of a thousand of some of our brightest and best from across the country, that that proceeds smoothly.
Also we have Tim Fischer, former Deputy Prime Minister of Australia, welcome Tim and thank you for your positive and constructive role in bringing together people to assist in this Summit and in your particular role in chairing the Summit working group which deals with the future of rural and regional Australia.
Also, I think we've got Warwick Smith here, who is assisting us on the infrastructure front, where have you gone Warwick? He's here. There he is. Buried behind the television camera. Usually in front of the television camera, Warwick.
And then, John Hartigan for assisting us in terms of the working group on governance and John's capacity as Chairman of the group across the media organisations seeking to promote greater freedom of speech in Australia and getting the balance right between the requirements for press access on the one hand and the construction of our freedom of information and associated laws on the other.
So, we have what can best be described in the classics as a very eclectic gathering of folk. And that's a really good thing. Because, you know something about this country of ours, it's a pretty eclectic country. And, I think that's one of its great strengths, its great dynamisms and its great energies.
When I look to the 2020 Summit, which will be held next weekend, I think that this is a great step forward for the country and it's for this simple reason: it's my long standing conclusion from a life which has been involved in the foreign service, the Queensland State public service, as a Member of Parliament and now as Prime Minister of Australia, that those of us involved directly in the political process don't have any monopoly on wisdom. In fact, as I travel around the business community, as I travel around professional organisations, non-Government organisations and our universities, our research institutes, our think tanks, I am always impressed by the sheer vitality of the ideas environment in this country.
And so the challenge of this Summit, and what we will also do today here in this gathering, is to make sure we've got a capacity of harnessing the creativity and the ideas of the Australian community at large into that which we do in Government. I don't think that's beyond our national wit and wisdom. I actually think it's a smart way to do business. I think it's a smart way in which you can run the country.
Ultimately, we were elected to make, as the Government, elected to make the decisions. But if we don't have available to us a mechanism to summon forth the energy, the ideas, the enthusiasm and the talents of the nation, then I don't think we're really trying hard enough. And that's what this whole process is about.
Obviously, what will come out the end of it will be a whole bunch of ideas, some of which will be brilliant, some of which may be a little less than brilliant. But I'm not in the business of saying prior to the event that there is something which is right and something that's wrong. There is something which is politically correct and something which is politically incorrect. We're in the business of encouraging genuine debate, genuine and thorough debate. And, can I say that is what is first and foremost of importance. And secondly, to ensure that from that we extract the best ideas for the nation's future.
I'm strongly of a view, as I think it's been written in books of wisdom and literature of which many in this room will be deeply familiar, that without a vision the people perish. And that therefore, we look forward to this nation's future in 10 or 20 years time and beyond that through the course of this extraordinarily dynamic century in this extraordinarily dynamic hemisphere in which we live and have our being, a hemisphere, East Asia, which will shape very much the future of the world in the 21st century, that we as a nation need to craft a vision with which we are at one - which we are prepared to then develop a concrete strategy to bring that vision about.
I don't want to be Prime Minister of a country where we simply drift. I'm not into the business of politics of national leadership for the sake of being there and observing the nation and its affairs simply drift from one event to another.
I think it was Harold McMillan who once famously said in the United Kingdom: what is politics about? To which Harold once famously said, ‘events dear boy, events'. Can I say, that's a very passive view of what you actually do. It's like you're waiting for something to come rolling down the in-tray of national political office before you then decide what to do. That's not the way in which I want to conduct the affairs of this nation. Nor is that the way in which the Government wishes to conduct the affairs of the nation.
You need to have a forward looking pro-active agenda. We need to take the future in our hands and shape it, shape it to the greatest extent we can in the direction of the sort of Australia we want for the future. An Australia which is built on these great principles: A strong Australia. A secure Australia. An Australia where we have a robust and competitive economy by the best global standards.
An Australia where we never extinguish the flame of a fair go, but in fact encourage it, across all things that we do - so that every Australian indigenous, non indigenous, Australians who have come from across the seas in recent times, and those who have been here for many generations, such as myself, and those who have been here since antiquity, our indigenous brothers and sisters, all have a decent start in this country. And beyond that, that we have a common project among us all to deal with the challenge which transcends all national boundaries, and that is the challenge of climate change.
And that through that we are not simply concerned with our project for domestic Australia, as if some how our talents and enthusiasm should stop at the continental shelf. But in fact, that we have a vision for how we would wish to shape the world as well. And that's what I describe as Australia's future in the area of creative middle power diplomacy.
So that's the broad architecture of a vision and the values for which this Government stands. But can I say, in terms of the policies which would give such a vision effect, what do we do in terms enhancing the productivity of our economy? What do we do in terms of building our nations infrastructure? How do we enhance fairness for indigenous Australians? What do we do to turbo charge research and the education revolution in Australia?
And beyond that again, how do we deal with the great challenge of preventative health care strategies so that we're not simply burdened with a medical structure and a health bureaucracy which is in permanent reactive mode to the problems which come rolling in the door, but we think 20 and 30 years ahead about how do we prevent diseases. How do we cure diseases and how do we prevent diseases? And how do we inject preventative health care into the mainstream of what we do as a nation?
So in all these critical challenge areas, we've posed questions to the nation. And that's why, through the structure of the 2020 Summit, we've been as specific as possible.
Next weekend in Canberra we have ten specific challenge areas which have been identified across the economy, social policy and of course our place in the world. And within that we've framed specific questions where we've asked participants at the Summit next weekend to come forward with their best ideas, their best policy ideas, about how we deal with each of those challenges.
Which brings us to our deliberations today. I thank you very much for taking the time to be with us. Particularly those who have come from afar. And the purpose of today's event is to provide an opportunity for members of the Jewish community to contribute ahead of the Passover.
Events such as this are for all Australians. Religious, non religious. Christian, Jewish, Muslim, doesn't matter what particular religious tradition we come from or non religious tradition we come from. Our common passion here is how do we shape a better and stronger Australia for the future, and an Australia which can be an even greater force for good in the world. So I thank you all for your participation.
The last thing I'd say before handing over to others for the organisational arrangements of today is this. This is not a gathering for the sake of having a gathering. Next weekend is not national gathering for the sake of getting together and having a lovely time, talking about a few idle ideas and ruminating on what might be and what could have been. It's quite different to that. What I want to do is to harness the ideas here today as I want to harness the ideas which emerge next weekend. As we will be harnessing the ideas which came out of the National Youth Summit in Canberra which concluded yesterday.
And the resolve of the Government is that by years end the ideas which emerge by consensus through these gatherings, the best and brightest of these ideas which these working groups put forward to the Government, our intention by years end is to respond to each and every one of them.
I will say in advance there will be some that we'll embrace with passion and enthusiasm, there some that we may embrace with less passion and enthusiasm and some that we may not be able to embrace at all. But our clear commitment to the nation is we will be responding and indicating clearly the reasons for advancing particular ideas and reasons why we may not be able to embrace others.
But I'm not in the business of cutting off the creativity first and saying that there are only certain proposals which will be embraced. That's not the way in which I think open Government does business and certainly not the way in which this open Government intends to do business.
So we look forward to your contribution today and I'll be moving across each of the tables here at our gathering. But I say this quite sincerely. That our intention is to not just ferment intellectual activity, ferment a competition of ideas. But our resolve is to harness ideas, to deploy them for the nations good and for the nations good for the long term future.
Thanks for your participation, thanks for your goodwill, and thank you in advance for the great ideas you'll advance for the national good.


Thanks very much. Sir Nicholas Shehadie, Tanya Plibersek the Minister for Housing, Keith Garner, Superintendent of the Wesley Mission, Nick Farr-Jones of the organising committee of Touch Life 2008, residents, and staff here at Edward Eagar Lodge, ladies and gentlemen.
I am still struggling with the challenge of donning the rugby shorts, and to the potential challenge of being someone fast, on the wing, in the presence of Sir Nicolas Shehadie and of Nick Farr-Jones, respectfully, on behalf of Keith Garner and myself, and without consulting with Keith Garner, we decline.
There are certain things from which the Australian public should be protected. And me in rugby shorts is one of them.
I did have two very successful seasons in the second row for the Under 14 “Es” at my college in Brisbane. And after those two seasons, Brother Alexis suggested my career could be better spent as a linesman.
It is the only place you could go after the 14 “Es” actually. There weren't any “Fs”. So thank you for the invitation, but no thanks.
You know this is a wonderful place to be this morning. The work that is going on here is a very good work. To all people who support this work, through the Uniting Church, through the Wesley Mission, through those who work here, as part of their commitment to the community, supported by companies such as Tony Crawford's DLA Phillips Fox, and people who just roll in the door and offer their help, it is a really good thing that you're doing.
It says everything about your sense of humanity and your sense of compassion. And I say this to Keith here, because the tradition he comes from, I think this place and what it has been used for today would make John Wesley be proud, the father of English Methodism.
The fact that this was once a Wesleyan chapel, a Methodist place of worship, and now is being used as a part of the church's mission to help the homeless, that's what Wesley was on about. Wesley shocked people in the middle of the 18th Century religious awakening in the United Kingdom, the great English revival, by saying that one of the first things they wanted to do was establish an infirmary for the poor in downtown London. The shocking and heretical proposition that the poor should be given free “physic” to use that great 18th Century term, and then schools for the poor, housing for the poor.
So I think Wesley would be very proud of you mate, well done.
Homelessness. Nick is right, it is a deep passion of mine and of Tanya's and of the Government. And in part, it is because of a very simple belief, that the beginning of human dignity is to be able to call some place home. That is the beginning of human dignity, wherever that place might be, to be able to call some place home.
And that is our starting point. And secondly, the fact that according to the cold hard statistics, we have more than 100,000 Australians who today have no place to call home.
Statistics we have more than 100,000 Australians who today have no place to call home. As Keith said before after 17 years of economic growth I think, as a country and a community, we can do better than that. We can't fix it all, but we can do a lot better than that.
It is not just 100,000 who, statisticians tell us are homeless. 14,000 of them are children. 14,000. Think of that next time you go to a football match. Just look at the crowd. When they announce that it is 20,000 in the crowd, take off a few, that's how many kids are homeless.
10,000 sleeping rough. It's a lot of people sleeping rough. And like Nick, I've faced this crisis of conscience as I've walked past those sleeping rough, and said, ‘what do I do? How can I help? What should I be doing?' And we are all often rendered speechless at those moments, and I certainly have been.
There's another reason for causing this to be a matter of core business for this Government, and that is that homelessness can happen to anybody. Homelessness can happen to anyone who's here. If you have a catastrophic accident, if your partner develops a gambling addiction, if for whatever reason, you run into one of life's great brick walls which are unable to be anticipated, and bang, all of those great assumptions about your future and how robust and how secure it is come falling down like a house of cards. It can happen to anybody.
And as I have travelled around homeless centres around the country and spoken to folk, the stories are extraordinary. I remember sitting down with Tanya some months ago now just spending an hour and a half just chatting to blokes in that particular place, about how they'd all got there. The life journeys are just extraordinary and from the most extraordinary origins as well. So it can happen to anybody and regrettably today, it is happening to everybody, that is, people from all walks of life.
As Keith again mentioned the challenges of housing affordability and the flow on effect of people wrestling with the mortgage, wresting with rents, to temporary accommodation, to staying with friends or as a young do and say “couch surfing”, and then you end up not knowing where. And if we don't think that is a problem, then I think our eyes are closed.
I am deeply concerned about the emergence of two Australias, deeply concerned about it. Last night with Tanya and others I was in Western Sydney. And we were talking to the community out there about the challenges in Western Sydney and those of housing affordability. And in private conversations afterwards about what social workers there dealing with their sleeves rolled up in putting band aids across people who cannot afford the mortgage and had to go elsewhere. It is all unfolding before us.
I think we can be better as a nation by saying that we don't want two Australias. I think we can be better as a nation saying there's something about us which says someone in need deserves a hand outstretched of human compassion and a hand up. Rather than a finger of condemnation, or even worse, the cold glance of indifference.
I think we can do that, I think it's within our wit and wisdom to do it. We're a pretty bright bunch of people. And it is reflected by the bunch of corporates here with us today. There are people with a heart as well. I think that speaks so well of who we are.
Our job as a Government is to provide leadership. We've said homelessness is a priority for the nation. We've said that by years end we'll produce this Government's first white paper on homelessness, we intend to do that, the works is now underway. We've said we're not interested in piecemeal solutions. We've said we understand and get it when all factors contributing to homelessness whether it's substance abuse or whether it's employment, or whether it's disability or mental illness, need to be embraced in a total strategy to deal with this endemic problem. That work is underway.
Our job is to provide that leadership. But secondly, the job of leadership is to say that we don't have all the answers. That's why Keith and others will be with us this coming weekend at the 2020 Summit where we're looking at housing and homelessness bringing together people from the philanthropic community, people from the public housing community, people from the private investment community and people from right across the show to say lets just shake the tree and see what good ideas come out of it. Innovative new programs, affordable rental accommodation - how do we do it better? How do we do it in a sustainable way? How do we do it so it's not just a piece of press release sort of waiting in the breeze which we forget about three weeks later?
I'm interested in being in Government in order to change things sustainably. I'm not interested in being in Government for the sake of being here and I'm not interested in being in Government for the sake of saying nice things. I think we can make a difference, but in making a difference, we need to be able to take in the best ideas available in the community beyond Government as well. And then, as Keith rightly said in his concluding remarks, partner with people in the private sector to make it work.
The good thing about Australia is we are a very practical mob. That is, we're interested in what delivers the outcome, what works. And if we end up partnering with investment houses and private firms and other forms of creative delivery of services for homeless, we bring to this table no sense of ideology whatsoever. Other than this  -  a sense of deep commitment that we want to change this problem and make it something of which this nation can be proud and a world leader in how to deal with the great challenge of homelessness.
Which brings us to the launch of Touch Life 2008. It's a good practical program. We need money to make these sorts of services work, and for those of you who are corporates here, and who have dug deep either in money or time, or in allowing your staff to contribute money or time, on behalf of the Government, and the people of Australia, I thank you. And we're going to ask you for a lot more.
This is a great program. It's good and practical, it's very Australian. How do you take something that we like doing, and some of us can do well  -  others less well, a reference to Keith not me, remember I had two successful seasons. How do we then harness all those things we like doing into raising money for a great cause?
So I thank all of those associated with Touch Life. It's a good practical initiative. I recognise the contribution of various of my parliamentary colleagues in making sure that this has got of the ground as well.
And therefore it is with great pleasure that I officially launch Touch Life 2008, and I wish this program every success as part of our national mission to deal with the challenge of national homelessness.


Thank you for the invitation to address the annual dinner of the Sydney Institute.
Since 1989, the Institute has been a platform for public policy debate on Australia's future.
The nation should always embrace such debate  -  with genuine intellectual passion and with genuine intellectual rigour.
Great challenges lie ahead of us.
Now more than ever, we need a real debate that transcends the old battlelines of the left and right of Australian politics.
The global context in which this debate now occurs has moved a long way over the last twenty years.
Market-based economic solutions have now been embraced across much of the current and former communist worlds.
At the same time, we have seen a parallel recognition in the capitalist west that Adam Smith's invisible hand does not represent the solution to every economic problem.
In recent times this has been demonstrated by the current debate on the proper regulation of global capital markets.
The real terrain for productive public policy debate resides in a clear recognition of:
     * how markets should be regulated to ensure equitable competition;
     * how to identify where markets fail; and
     * what represents the proper scope for the provision of public goods such as education, health, a humane safety net and global environmental sustainability; and
     * how we build the nation's competitive strengths in an increasingly competitive global economy.
Each of these invite a rich political and policy debate in itself.
These are the core debates at the progressive, reforming centre of contemporary Australian politics.
And these are very much the debates that the Government intends to advance.
The purpose of my remarks tonight is to provide a broad outline of the Government's vision for the nation's future; the start that we have made in advancing that vision; and the role we hope the upcoming national summit can play in taking that vision forward into the longer term future.
Values, Vision and a Strategy for the Nation's Future
The new Australian Government is committed to building a modern, competitive Australia capable of meeting the challenges of the 21st century  -  to secure the nation's future as well as a future for working families.
Our agenda for achieving this is shaped by the core values for which we stand.
Values of security.
Of liberty.
Of opportunity.
Of creativity.
Values also of equity.
Of family.
Of community.
Of solidarity.
Of sustainability.
And an underlying fundamental value of an irreducible human dignity.
These values very much shape the Government's vision for Australia's future.
We are committed to a secure Australia  -  strong at home and fully engaged abroad through what I have described elsewhere as a creative middle power diplomacy.
We are committed to building a robust economy  -  through a combination of responsible economic management and a program to enhance Australia's global economic competitiveness.
We are committed to opportunity for all Australians, not just for some  -  through a vision for Australia to develop the best educated, best trained, best skilled workforce in the world.
We are committed to a creative Australia where imagination and creativity drive our efforts in the arts, sciences and the development of a pervasive national culture of innovation and enterprise.
We are committed to the advancement of a fair go for all Australians through education, health and the rules that govern workplaces. We believe that as a Labor government it is our responsibility to challenge the limitations placed on people's potential (including the potential of indigenous Australians) by the circumstances they inherit.
We are committed to the protection of the family by advancing family friendly workplaces and better work-life balance.
We are committed to the concept of community  -  not as a collection of disconnected individuals but as a place where people are bound by common core values and a common sense of responsibility to one another.
We are committed to a principle of social solidarity that extends beyond private philanthropy to a public responsibility to protect the most vulnerable through a humane safety net for all Australians.
We are also committed to the greatest public good of our age  -  the protection of the global commons that is the planet itself - both for all who share the planet today and for those who come after us.
Finally we are committed to fundamental human dignity, through a judicial system that provides for the proper protection of the basic human rights of all.
Part of our vision is to give every opportunity to individuals to provide for their own future by rewarding hard work, enterprise and success.
While part of our vision also goes to a contrasting (but at the same time reinforcing) sense of social responsibility.
In fact our vision incorporates quite consciously a combination of private markets and public goods.
Or what I have already called tonight a new tradition of the reforming centre of Australian politics.
This is where I believe the modern Australia of the 21st century wants to go.
For many years it has been unfashionable to talk of a vision for the nation's future.
In fact, some have argued that framing such a vision is ideologically unsustainable because nations simply evolve as a consequence of the market forces that shape them.
I disagree because I believe a small country occupying a vast continent in a region as wildly disparate as our own has no option other than to plan for its future.
As it is written elsewhere, “without a vision, the people perish”.
I believe that as a nation we need to come together around clear, long-term goals for the Australia of 2020 and beyond.
These objectives should be ambitious.
Excessive caution and a fear of failure should not hold us back.
In fact it has been the absence of such agreed national goals over the last decade that has seen us waste the great dividend that has flowed to Australia through our record terms of trade.
How different it would be now, if we had invested the estimated $398 billion boost to the Budget bottom line in the decade from 2002, into funding a total education revolution?
But instead of investing in the future, against concrete, realisable goals, the revenue was consigned to consumption  -  both public and private.
Opportunities squandered. Rather than opportunities seized.
In the century ahead, it's not unreasonable for Australia to aspire to be the best place on earth to live, to gain an education, to work and to raise a family:
     * a nation with first-rate business and employment opportunities, powered by the world's most educated, most skilled and best trained workforce in the world;
     * a nation where we strive for the highest public health standards in the world;
     * a nation where we care for the vulnerable and where we include the marginalised;
     * a dynamic, vibrant culture incorporating the best of our many immigrant cultures within the best traditions of European civilisation that we have inherited  -  turbo-charged with the best understanding across the collective West of the languages and cultures of the high civilisations of Asia, and
     * a nation with a liveable climate, a clean environment and extraordinary, well protected natural beauty.
We can also be a nation with a sense of wider purpose  -  not a nation turned in on itself and occupied only with its own future, but:
     * a nation that is a great force for good in the world;
     * a nation that contributes to peace and prosperity in our region and beyond;
     * a nation whose belief in the ‘fair go' extends beyond the continental shelf;
     * a multicultural, multilingual nation standing on the doorstep of the world's fastest growth region, and
     * a nation that fully comprehends the meeting place between East and West as the Asia-Pacific century begins to unfold.
But the kind of nation we are in 2020 will be only what we plan for, and what we build together.
And that, in large part, is why in a few days' time we are convening the national 2020 Summit:
     * to unleash the national imagination from beyond the ranks of politics and the public service, and
     * to help fashion a national consensus around a common vision for the nation, with common goals to aim for within that vision.
We can either drift into the future or we can take hold of the future with our own hands  -  to shape the future, to seize the day.
Progress to date
We have been in office for a little over four months  -  and we've been making progress towards our vision for a modern Australia:
     * Within minutes of taking office, the Government signed the instruments to the Kyoto Protocol and we are now active participants in the Bali Roadmap on climate change.
     * On the first sitting day of our Parliament, I extended an apology to the stolen generations of Indigenous Australians, and we have begun a policy program of closing the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous life opportunities in Australia.
     * The Government has also embraced a comprehensive productivity agenda based on a new program of microeconomic reform beginning with an education revolution and reform of the nation's infrastructure.
     * The Government has commenced a new era in Commonwealth/State relations through the COAG reform process - to reform the Federation, to remove the regulatory burden on business, and to rebuild our nation's health system.
     * The Government has concluded an historic agreement with the state and territory governments of Australia to establish a single national authority to manage Australia's major inland river system  -  the Murray-Darling  -  whose future is threatened by the impact of over use and climate change.
     * The Government also has commissioned its first White Paper on homelessness and is looking at how to invest in compassionate, market-based solutions which deal with this important social policy challenge.
     * Internationally the Government has been active in establishing the three pillars of our relationship with the world: a strong alliance with the US, engagement with the United Nations (including our candidacy for the UN Security Council after a 25 year absence) and a strong commitment to our own immediate region, including a determination to tackle under-development across the Pacific Island states through our new proposal for Pacific Partnerships for Development.
     * And most recently, the Government has also advanced the cause of greater gender equality by appointing the first female Governor General in 107 years.
Through these actions we have made progress in our first four months.
It is a start.
But it is only a start.
And, as we move towards a bolder, more ambitious reform program for the future we are also conscious of the challenges we face in implementing that program  -  including the storm clouds that continue to gather across the global economy.
Global Economic Challenges
The global economic context has clearly become more complicated since we took office.
The global economic outlook has sharply deteriorated  -  with a double warning of lower growth and higher inflation.
Last week the International Monetary Fund estimated a 25 per cent probability of global growth slowing to three per cent or less in 2008-09, equivalent to a global recession.
The Fund has now lowered its global growth forecast to 3.7 per cent this year from a 4.1 per cent prediction in January.
It anticipates a “mild recession” in the U.S and slower growth in Europe and Japan.
It also noted that growth would slow in the emerging Asian economies from 7.4 per cent in 2007 to 6.2 per cent this year as a result of further global financial market turbulence and reduced demand for Asian exports.
Recent developments in financial markets also affect the financial security of Australia's working families, because of its impact on the real economy and the availability of credit for lending.
As financial markets become more global, so too must proper regulation, supervision and transparency become more global - but without crushing the capacity of markets themselves to respond flexibly to new opportunities in the future.
Recently, I have spoken at length about these challenges with policy leaders, financial decision makers and regulators in the US, UK, the wider EU and China  -  including the head of the IMF.
I emphasised Australia's willingness to contribute to what must be a global response by our respective national regulators to what is truly a global financial crisis.
The Reserve Bank of Australia is actively contributing to the work of the Financial Stability Forum.
We are also taking action at home. The Government's approach involves several elements including monitoring liquidity needs internationally and, through the RBA, participating where appropriate in coordinated central bank action.
We will continue to monitor the Australian financial system in light of the current turbulence to ensure that it remains efficient, flexible and competitive.
Beyond these immediate measures concerning financial market stability, it is now more critical than ever at a time of declining global economic confidence to bring the Doha Round of free trade discussions to a successful conclusion.
That is why the Government is redoubling its efforts in Geneva and why Doha was a prominent feature of my discussions in Washington, Brussels and London.
In summary, the global economic context in which the new Government is framing its long term reform strategy, as well as the upcoming budget, is the most challenging Australia has faced since the Asian financial crisis of 1997 and arguably since the global recession of the early 1990s.
The cornerstone of the Government's economic strategy therefore is responsible economic management, maintaining our anti-inflation strategy based on producing a significant budget surplus while at the same time advancing a comprehensive agenda of microeconomic reform aimed at boosting long term productivity growth.
Global conditions in 2020
Looking forward to the decade ahead, Australia must be mindful of both the immediate challenges to the global economy  -  as well as the unfolding mega-challenges that are radically transforming the world in which Australia must carve out its future.
We know that on current trends, the demography of our planet will change significantly over the next twelve years.
By 2020 the world's population will have grown by another billion to 7.6 billion people.
By 2020 a representative group of 100 global citizens would include:
     * 56 Asians, including nineteen Chinese and seventeen Indians;
     * 16 Africans;
     * four from the United States;
     * five Western Europeans, and
     * not even one Australian.
In 2020 the world's five largest cities by population will be Seoul, São Paulo, Bombay, Jakarta, and Karachi  -  all cities in emerging economies.
We also know that, on current projections, the global balance of economic power will shift significantly over the next 12 years.
By 2020 the world economy is expected to be about 80 percent larger than it is today.
The average per capita income will be roughly 50 per cent higher.
By 2020 Asia will have grown to 43 per cent of world GDP and Asia's economy will be larger than the US and Europe combined.
Alongside the shift in economic power, there are likely to be parallel shifts in the global strategic balance of power.
China's defence spending is forecast to rise to $150 billion per year, according to the US National Intelligence Council  -  making it second only to the United States.
By 2020, the demands on the world's energy resources will have increased dramatically by nearly 50 per cent.
China alone will seek to increase its energy consumption by about 150 per cent by 2020 to maintain a steady rate of growth.
Even though the world's fossil fuel reserves are being depleted at a rapid rate, absent policy change, alternative energy will still account for only a small fraction of overall energy consumption in 2020.
As our use of fossil fuels increases, so will its observable effects on the natural environment that sustains us all.
Sea levels will rise, temperatures will increase and there will be more extreme weather events.
Climate change means variable water availability; more frequent droughts, floods and bushfires; altered distribution of pests and weeds and the move of tropical diseases into what are currently categorised as temperate zones.
Australia in 2020
Australia too will have changed significantly by 2020.
Our annual output, on current Treasury projections, will have risen by $400 billion to $1.4 trillion dollars.
GDP per capita will have risen by around $11,000 to over $60,000.
Australia's population in 2020 is expected to grow to over 25 million people, while the median age of our population will increase from 36 to 40 years.
Our population of Australians over 85 will have doubled from 300,000 now to 600,000 by 2020, with profound implications for national health care expenditures.
The number of households in Australia will grow by an additional 3 million in the next 15 years but the average size of those households will likely continue to decline. By 2020 the average Australian household will contain just 2.2 people.
If current trends continue, by 2020, diabetes will be the leading cause of disease for men and the second leading cause for women.
Dementia, anxiety and depression, will feature in the leading four health challenges for both men and women.
On a three decade projection, the fastest escalation in costs in health expenditure will be incurred by diabetes, at 400%, followed by neurological disorders, at 280%.
Those statistics give us just a snapshot of the challenges we confront in the years ahead.
2020 Summit
This gives some indication of the depth and breadth of the global and national challenges Australia faces in planning for the decade ahead.
In planning ahead for this decade, the most powerful force in our nation is not the Federal Government's capacity to make laws or implement programs from on high.
The Government cannot, on its own, legislate productivity, competitiveness, business innovation, or healthier lifestyles.
Our most powerful force is the ideas, talent and energy of the Australian people themselves.
Our greatest potential lies in forging a new partnership between communities, businesses, the various levels of government and other non-government organisations  -  to work together to tackle the big challenges that lie ahead.
If as a nation we are genuinely practical and empirical in our approach to finding new approaches to tackle old problems then we can move forward.
And many of these new discoveries will dissolve old debates between left and right based on outmoded versions of reality.
Witness for example the collapse of the age-old debate between welfare entitlement and individual responsibility  -  largely because community engagement has taught us that mutual responsibility is the best way forward both for the individual and for the public purse.
If we therefore genuinely engage society, and not merely the state  -  in other words, Australian people and not just Australian governments - then we will begin to also identify a new way of doing business for the nation.
The Australia 2020 Summit is an important part of this process  -  recognising that government does not have all the wisdom, and recognising that our political opponents also have a contribution to make . This is why we welcome contributions to the Summit from across the political spectrum.
This is why we have included distinguished Australians like former National Party leader Tim Fischer and former Liberal minister Warwick Smith as co-chairs of different streams in the Summit.
I also welcome the participation of the Leader of the Opposition.
The 2020 Summit is an opportunity for us all to rise above partisan politics, and we should create more such opportunities in national life.
The Summit will address the long term challenges confronting Australia's future across 10 critical areas:
     * Future directions for the Australian economy  -  and how we build a competitive economy in a world being transformed by the rise of China and India.
     * The productivity agenda - including education, skills, training, science and innovation.
     * Population, sustainability, climate change and water.
     * Future directions for rural industries and rural communities.
     * A long-term national health strategy  -  including the challenges of preventative health, workforce planning and the ageing population.
     * Strengthening communities, supporting families and social inclusion.
     * Options for the future of Indigenous Australia.
     * Towards a creative Australia: the future of the arts, film and design.
     * The future of Australian governance: renewed democracy, a more open government (including the role of the media), the structure of the Federation and the rights and responsibilities of citizens.
     * Australia's future security and prosperity in a rapidly changing region and world.
In the lead-up to this weekend we have already conducted Local 2020 Summits, School 2020 Summits, a national Youth 2020 Summit and one on Monday with the Jewish community given that next weekend coincides with the Passover.
The Local 2020 Summits have attracted thousands of attendees.
The School summits have been held in more than 500 schools.
Some students offered very practical ideas, like tackling the rural skill shortage with a ‘farm bonus' that would operate like the baby bonus, giving an incentive for students to return to their local communities after vocational training.
Some responses highlighted serious social problems. Many students have commented on their parents' long work hours, and some have sobering words:
“Give advice to parents  -  teach people how to be a mum and dad... We should help people so they don't have to work so much... Parents need to play with their kids more... Parents need to pay more attention to their children.... There is no time for kids, kids need more time.”
On a similar theme, a group of students mid-way through high school recommended some positive steps:
“Increase interaction between parents and children through working from home, reducing work hours, a ‘Take Your Children to Work Day' every so often. The employer could also give out promotions which will help to build up family activities, eg tickets to theme parks and sport games.” 
A Victorian student linked modern work demands to future health problems:
“Exercise? No time in future because we work longer hours.”
Today's students love new technology, but many show a sophisticated understanding of how technology is contributing to social isolation  -  like the primary school student in Queensland who remarked:
“People won't have to leave their houses because everything will be able to be completed online and delivered to the door and this will be very sad.”
School teachers have done a particularly first rate job in getting their students to think about how we make Australia an even better place.
After the completion of these School Summits, last weekend Parliament House hosted a national Youth 2020 Summit.
One hundred young Australian leaders came together to put forward thoughtful and substantive proposals on matters including education, preventative health, mental health, climate change and Australia's place in the world.
The Youth Summit came up with ten key proposals and 30 additional ideas, and my Department is now reviewing them in more detail.
Participants in all these events would confirm that we have no predetermined agenda and no predetermined outcomes.
To help focus the discussions this weekend, I will be asking each of the working group co-chairs to nominate at least one ‘big idea' in their area for the future.
Second, I will also ask them to submit at least three concrete policy ideas, at least one of which must involve no cost or negligible costs.
And third, I will be asking them to identify at least three specific goals for which we should aim by 2020.
The Government will sift through the submissions and recommendations from the Summit and provide a response to its outcomes by the end of this year.
I will also be taking a proposal along to the Summit for discussion.
My proposal for Australia in the year 2020 is to create universal, high quality, affordable Parent and Child Centres for all 0-5 year old Australian children.
I believe such centres could offer real, practical assistance to working families under financial pressures struggling with the practical challenges of raising very young children.
These Parent and Child Centres will bring together maternal and child health, long day care and preschool into one stop shops for parents with young kids.
The goal of this ambitious proposal would be to offer all parents with 0-5 year olds access to a one stop early childhood centre that provides:
     * maternal and child health services such as baby health checks, baby weighing, feeding advice and vaccinations;
     * long day care including play-based activities for children whose parents are at work or studying;
     * preschool and early learning including age-appropriate play-based learning provided by a four year qualified teacher; and
     * playgroups and parental support and advice to ensure parents have a place to meet their peers and get access to advice while their children play.
This model would require partnerships between Federal State and local governments as well as existing private and community service providers.
The aim would be to provide most of these services at low cost to parents - however some services on offer (such as long day care services) would continue to be fee-based but with the cost still subsidised by the Government.
Access to these Parent and Child Centres would be universal, but not compulsory, and the quality of service provided would be underpinned by strengthened national quality standards.
Some or all of the services offered in these centres could be supplied by the private sector and would be subject to competition between providers, helping to drive quality up and prices down.
A single service centre model for all 0-5 year olds would offer great benefits to kids, great benefits to parents, and great benefits to the whole community.
It would improve the quality of health and education and care services for 0-5s, with:
     * Better quality care that is underpinned by strengthened national quality standards;
     * The introduction of more four year trained early childhood education professionals for all young children regardless of age; and
     * Provision of education, health and other supports for children to make sure they are developing both physically and intellectually.
These Centres could improve the level of support for parents:
     * Providing convenient health, education and care services for working parents;
     * Providing age-appropriate services for parents with several kids under 5; and
     * Providing opportunities for non-working parents to meet, to develop peer supports and to access advice while their children play.
These Centres could also improve outcomes for the whole community:
     * Making better use of early childhood resources, reducing duplication, which means more money for frontline services;
     * Freeing up capacity to strengthen national quality standards; and
     * Providing additional support to disadvantaged families to improve the life chances of their children.
A little over a century ago, few would have dreamt that today we would have universal and affordable schooling for our children.
We have already set ourselves the goal of introducing universal preschool services for all four year olds by 2013.
We should aim to take the next step and create universal Parent and Child Centres for all children aged 0-5 by 2020.
Early childhood reform lies at the intersection of our aspirations for this nation:
     * lifting long term productivity and participation through greater investment in education, particularly the early years;
     * a commitment to reducing the cost of living pressures on working families; and
     * a serious effort to reducing the opportunity gap that holds back children from disadvantaged families and communities across the nation.
This proposal builds on the extensive research which has already been done on the critical impact of a child's early nurturing, care and engagement with learning, on every aspect of their later life.
The proposal has been put forward to be debated on its merits.
And I look forward to the inputs of my fellow Summit participants on this and other proposals this coming weekend.
Conclusion
Twelve years from now, another group of Australians will gather to celebrate the Sydney Institute's 2020 Annual Dinner, marking what will be the Institute's 31st year.
Who knows what they will take as their subject  -  maybe the low carbon energy revolution in response to climate change; the rise and rise of India; new security challenges from a new generation of contagious diseases; new transformational technologies, or perhaps the new challenges of inter-faith dialogue among the 80 per cent of the world's population who are religious believers.
I hope they can look back on the Australia of twelve years ago and say, 2008 was something of a turning point.
A time when Australia saw its potential, recognised its strengths and seized the future.
A time when we took stock, looked beyond the trenches for a bit and imagined what we as a people might become.
A time when we said that we were done with short-term thinking and began substantial planning for the long term.
A time when we injected not just new ideas but also a new approach to policy making.
A time when we brought into the policy making process people whose skills and ideas had never been fully embraced before.
And I hope the results will be evident in the modern Australia of 2020.
A nation whose education revolution has transformed future opportunities for a rising generation of young Australians.
A nation with a key role in expanding global markets  -  perhaps clean energy technologies; the biosciences; agricultural innovation and across our service industries.
A nation that leads in its response to climate change.
A nation that has become a great force for good in its region and the world.


Australians one, Australians all.
I too begin by acknowledging the first peoples of our nation.
Just as I welcome all of you to this, the nation's capital, to this, the nation's Parliament.
To this, the great meeting place of our common democracy, Australia.
The place from which we your elected representatives seek to navigate our nation's future.
Today we are trying to do something new.
Today we are throwing open the windows of our democracy, to let a little bit of fresh air in.
Rather than pretending that we the politicians of Australia have all the answers, and the truth is, we don't, we are turning now to you, the people of Australia.
And you have travelled a long, long way to be with us. From the tip of Cape York, all the way to the tip of Cape Leeuwin, from Tasmania to the top end.
1000, Glyn told me this morning 1002, will identify those two very soon. You in the back.
1000 Australians, Indigenous and non Indigenous, early settlers families and those most recently arrived.
City and country, industry and labour, academics and non academics, women and men, our youth, and lets face it, our not so youthful.
But what unites us all is a great optimism for this nation Australia's future.
What we are looking for from this Summit are new ideas for our nation's future.
What we are looking for from this Summit are new directions for our nation's future.
And if we succeed, what we are looking for is also new insights into how we can govern Australia, a new way of governing our nation.
Because the old way of governing has long been creaking and groaning.
Often a triumph of the short term over the long term.
Often a triumph of the trivial over the substantial.
Often a triumph of the partisan over the positive.
And the truth is all sides of politics, Brendan's and mine, we are both guilty of this. It is time we started to try and turn a page.
There is another reason for holding this Summit and that is because the challenges the nation now faces are unprecedented in complexity and intensity.
The sheer dynamics of climate change. The Governor General's example of the changes represented by the column of ice from Antarctica. The drying of what is already the world's driest continent.
The rise of China. The rise of India. The great economic and geopolitical transformation of the 121st Century which those two rises represent.
Quite apart from the rolling structural vulnerabilities of an increasingly inter-dependant global economic order.
A further reason we are here is the breathtaking pace of change.
As we look ahead, the year 2020 is not that far away. It is just 12 years from now.
Yet we know that the world of 2020 will be vastly different world from the world of today.
And how do we know that?
We simply need to look back 12 years and see where we have come from.
There were three million fewer Australians in 1996 than there are today.
Only one in three Australian households had a mobile phone.
We were barely using email or the internet - just 300,000 Australian home computer users were connected to the internet at home.
We had never heard of Facebook, we had never heard of Myspace, or even Google.
Most Australian households did not even have a computer at all, and in a 1996 survey, a majority of Australians said their main reason for not having a computer was either that they had ‘no use for one' or ‘no one in household [was] interested in [a] computer' (Australian Bureau of Statistics survey, 1996)
That was 12 years ago. ABS data, It must be true.
Times change and with a frightening pace of change.
Today, more than five million of Australia's eight million households are connected to the internet.
Everyday we use the internet to work, to get our news, to get our sport updates, to plan our holidays, and to stay in touch with family and friends.
The world in 1996, and today
Change comes quickly to the world as well in addition to the changes we see unfolding in our daily lives.
Globally, 12 years ago nations were still coming to terms with the end of the Cold War.
To a large extent, terrorism was something that happened in Israel Palestine, Northern Ireland or Northern Spain. A handful of trouble spots.
How that has changed.
The value of China's exports represented just one eighth of what it is today, 12 years ago.
Debate on climate change was only just beginning to stir.
The report of the second International Panel on Climate Change had only just been released, concluding for the first time that the world was getting warmer, and human activity was partly to blame.
The point is, we've seen extraordinary transformations in Australia and extraordinary transformations across the world these last 12 years.
And we need therefore, now more than ever, to anticipate change ahead, or else we will be swamped by it.
That is why the Government is committed to building a modern Australia capable of meeting the challenges of the 21st Century.
That is why the Government has posed this Summit some specific questions. And we want your ideas on how to meet these challenges.
The ten core challenges for the future
     * How we can build a strong foundation for future prosperity, in a global economy that will be transformed by the rise of China and India and other developing economies; and how we ensure our prosperity does not rest only on the ups and downs of commodity markets but also on what we can craft out of our human capital.
     * How we can have the best educated, best skilled, best trained workforce in the world  -  a workforce whose innovation and ingenuity drives productivity growth forward.
     * How we respond to the enormous challenge of climate change and become a leader in tomorrow's lower carbon energy revolution.
     * How we ensure a strong future for rural industries and rural communities at a time when the world, once again is debating the possibility of global food shortages.
     * How we develop a long-term national health strategy  -  and don't simply surrender to the trend of rising chronic disease rates. But instead say, ‘there is a different way of doing this'
     * How we build stronger communities, stronger families and a society that works hard, not to leave any single Australian behind.
     * How we close the gap on Indigenous disadvantage and ensure life opportunities for Indigenous Australians, comparable to those enjoyed by all Australians. That should be our goal.
     * How we build a creative arts industry that reflect Australia's unique story that carries our unique culture to the rest of the world.
     * How we reform our system of governance for the needs of the 21st Century rather than perpetuating some of the structures from the 19th Century.
     * How we ensure Australia's future security and prosperity in a rapidly changing region and world.
That's an easy set of questions. They are just some of the challenges we face, but they are the big ones.
And this Summit, we argue, is just the beginning of the process of responding to those challenges.
Already there are those who are predicting that the Summit will fail.
In fact some have predicted that it has already failed. Some have said it is too big. Some have said it is too small. Some have said that it is not representative enough.
I challenge anyone to find a group which could ever claim to be fully representative of any nation, it is very hard.
Some say that consensus on anything is impossible because it produces the democratic divide.
Whereas I say on certain fundamentals, the challenge is in fact, to build a consensus around those things that really count for the long term.
I say to everyone here, we should just be relaxed about any such criticism.
It is great. It is a reflection of a democracy in which we live. Roll with the punches. That is what it is all about.
I say it is worth having a go through this Summit, even if we fail.
After all, what is there to be lost from trying?
And as I have said before, what is our simple objective here: to shake the tree and to see if from the great talents, energies and enthusiasms and ideas of this nation, we can through this process of the next two days bring forth, say a dozen new ideas about how we can shape our nation's future, together.
We do that, we will have done some really good work here.
A few words about how this weekend will unfold.
To help focus the discussions, I have made three requests of the working group co-chairs:
First, to nominate at least one ‘big idea' in their area for the future.
Second, I am asking them to submit at least three, and I am sure there will be more, concrete policy ideas, at least one of which is to involve no cost or negligible cost.
No cost, or negligible cost. No cost or negligible cost. I have lost my place...
Third, I am asking them to identify at least three specific goals for which we should aim by 2020.
The Government is committed to respond to each of the recommendations which are put forward by the 10 working groups by years' end.
That is our commitment to you.
Some of these ideas, we will be able to embrace.
Others, we will not.
And some we will take in part and change.
But you know something? It is far better we ask the question, and have the answers come forward so that the whole process of national creativity in the ideas debate for our future occurs, rather than throttling it before it starts.
There are no right and wrong answers when it comes to a discussion among people of good heart, good mind and good will.
Finally, I want to thank-you, to the thousands of Australians who have already taken part in Summit across the country.
We've had local 2020 Summits that have attracted tens of thousands of Australians in communities right across the nation.
School summits that have been held in more than 500 schools.
A national youth 2020 Summit which we have just seen part of on the video screen before you.
And in the past week we've also seen a Summit for the Jewish community, because of the clash with the Passover, and other local community Summit's as well.
3,000 ideas submissions on the Australia 2020 website. And thank you to every one for their participation in this debate on the nation's future.
More than 8,000 people applied to be here this weekend, and I want to thank those each and every one of them for expressing their interest in being here among us.
Congratulations to those who have been selected to be here, through the process of the 10 person committee chaired by Glyn Davis.
And can I say as Prime Minister of the country, in this, the Parliament of the country, you are all very, very welcome.
To conclude, the job of Government is to set a strategic vision for the nation.
I have a simple view which is that without a vision the people do perish.
A nation needs a vision.
Government must then invite the nation to respond to that vision and to give that vision flesh and bones and to advance ideas to translate a vision into reality.
As a nation I think we face two overall choices. We can either drift into the future or we can plan for the future.
I say it is time, well and truly time to seize the future with both hands, to build a new Australia.
To build a better Australia, a better Australia for all of our people, as well as turning this great nation of ours Australia, to an even greater force for good in the world.
And now ladies and gentlemen, summiteers, it is over to you.


We stand here today in this avenue of heroes. 
This avenue called ANZAC.
This avenue with its monuments of steel and stone.
Silent, still, but speaking to us softly with the voices of a hundred thousand souls.
Each one of them with their name etched with care on the walls of this great memorial which stands behind us.
Each one of them the name of a precious life cut short through service to the nation.
For they were the best of us.
And not just these one hundred thousand who spilt their young lives.
But the million and more who have worn the nation's uniform in war and whose lives were forever changed.
And the lives of their families  -  where lives shattered and lives lost also left their wrenching human mark.
I met some such families yesterday  -  the families of HMAS Sydney.
I met widows married barely a year before Sydney was lost.
I met sons and daughters who never knew their fathers because Sydney went down before they were born.
I met others who lined the streets to hail Sydney's returning heroes from her exploits in the Mediterranean  -  daughters who as little ones had cheered their dads as they marched down George street but who six months later with the weeping mothers crammed into the cathedral trying to fathom their fathers' loss  -  the same cathedral where yesterday we once again as a nation met to remember them.
And then there were their mates  -  still scratching their heads, wondering why fate had intervened, and why they were not among their ship's crew at Fremantle for its final voyage.
St Andrew's Cathedral yesterday was like this great open-air cathedral today  -  awash with raw emotion; awash with the bewilderment of loss; but galvanised still with a steely pride.
So what would this brave company of men and women  -  these hundred thousand voices  -  a have to say to us today?
What would the 645 brave men who these last 66 years have lain entombed in Sydney's iron grave beneath the deep  -  what would they say to us today?
What is it about their stories that wrenches us still  -  fully 90 years after the Armistice that ended the war to end all wars.
I think it is this.
That whatever the comforts of our modern age; whatever its distractions and whatever its disillusionments  -  that there is something unique about this land Australia and the ideals for which we Australians stand.
That this is a place of unparalleled beauty.
That we are a good people who want for the good of others.
That we stand for a deep sense of liberty for which our forebears fought and which should never be surrendered  -  whatever the cost.
That we are a people who by instinct cannot stand idly by and be indifferent to the suffering of others.
A people with a sense of a fair go for all carved deep into our national soul.
A people also alert to the needs of our friends and allies.
These are the values which summoned forth the sons and daughters of ANZAC over the last 100 years from our smallest towns, our greatest cities and our most remote outback.
It is this, I believe, that touches us afresh each ANZAC morning  -  the fresh voices of those who have indeed not grown old because their voices still whisper to us amid the quiet reflections of this sombre day.
So what of the future?
Will these great ANZAC values fade as human memories fade?
I think not.
In fact I know not.
I have an absolute confidence that these values run deep in the veins of young Australians  -  such as those young Australians who as we speak here today gather silently and reverently around Anzac Cove on Galipolli's shores.
And not just there - but across the hundreds of theatres in which our one hundred thousand heroes fought and died.
At Villers-Bretonneux where 90 years ago today we lost one and a half thousand winning liberty for a single village of France.
Beyond the killing fields of the Western Front, Australians will also gather today in North Africa and the Middle East.
At Hell Fire Pass and on Kokoda.
In Korea, Malaysia and Vietnam.
And at the cenotaphs spread richly across this vast continent honouring each ANZAC name and the homes from which they sprung.
And for all of us, wherever we gather this morning, their voice, the voice of those one hundred thousand heroes, is clarion clear: hold fast to these values for the future; give of ourselves not just for ourselves but for our nation; and remain forever vigilant in the defence of our liberty.
For the price of this nation's continuing liberty is our eternal vigilance.
Always striving for peace.
Always ready should peace fail.
This at least we owe them.
To our men and women in uniform today, I say thank you on behalf of a grateful nation.
To those on duty today in Iraq, Afghanistan, East Timor, Solomon Islands, Sudan, the Sinai and Lebanon  -  I say thank you on behalf of a grateful nation.
I say again what I have said before; there is no higher calling in Australia then to wear this nation's uniform.
To our veterans here assembled; to those on parade across the country and to those whose limbs no longer allow them; I again say thankyou on behalf of a grateful nation.
To their families  -  those who have born the scars of war for a lifetime in a way which no one else can begin to understand; I say thank you on behalf of a grateful nation.
There are many grand avenues in the great cities of the world - most of them much older than this one.
But there is something haunting, almost holy, about this avenue of heroes here in our nation's capital.
At one end, this memorial to Australia's war dead.
Looking down to the other end to the great monumental symbols of Australia's hard-won freedom.
Causing us to remember afresh this day that one is always guaranteed by the other.
For freedom is always purchased by sacrifice.
Lest we forget.


Acknowledgements
     * Senator John Faulkner, Cabinet Minister and Special Minister of State
     * Public Service Commissioner Lynelle Briggs
     * Secretary Terry Moran and heads of public service agencies
     * Members of the Senior Executive Service
I begin this morning by honouring the traditional owners of this land on which the Parliament now sits.
Thank you for the efforts that each of you have made to attend this morning.
I know that your workload has been unusually heavy in recent months.
Alongside an exhaustive spending review process for the Budget, the transition to a new government means managing new priorities and new policies, and adjusting to new ministers and their offices.
The leadership roles that each of you exercise require you to balance the day to day needs of government with longer term policy and planning; in short, the reactive versus the strategic.
In the early days of a new government you face both enormous day to day demands while also needing to start implementing new policy platforms.
The transition to a new government is made even harder when it is so many years since the last change of government. Almost two thirds of today's workforce was not even working in the APS when the government last changed in 1996, and has therefore never gone through this process before.
But a transition like this is a learning experience for everyone.
Just imagine what it was like for those of us in Queensland when the Goss Government won office in 1989.
The last change of government had occurred in 1957  -  some 32 years before!
It's a credit to the APS that the transition to the new Government has been so seamless.
So let me say on behalf of the whole ministry, we do appreciate the enormous amount of work that has been done to date.
You are public policy professionals.
You have chosen your career because you believe public policy counts.
You have chosen a good career path because it is about the public good.
It is about something bigger than yourselves.
Furthermore, the work that you do is essential for the nation.
In public service, you  -  like us in the Parliament  -  have a great privilege.
Together, we help to shape our nation's future  -  our national security, our economic future and the fabric of our future society.
We help expand opportunities for working Australians.
And we help Australian families who need a helping hand on the way through.
Today, I've been asked to outline to the SES the Government's policy priorities for the future.
And in doing so, I'll seek to outline the importance the Government attaches to the public service in implementing these policy priorities into the future.
The Government's reform agenda
The new Government was elected with a comprehensive and challenging long-term policy agenda.
We are committed to building a modern, competitive Australia capable of meeting the challenges of the 21st century  -  to secure the nation's future as well as a future for working families.
We are committed to building a strong foundation for future prosperity  -  through responsible economic management and by enhancing Australia's international competitiveness and productivity.
The Government's productivity agenda begins with a comprehensive long-term program of reforms to our education system, ranging from early childhood services through to schools and training, and right through to universities and research programs.
Developing our broadband infrastructure is also one of the keys to lifting our productivity. Broadband is a transformational technology that offers large long term productivity gains across every sector of the economy  -  private sector, public sector and the third sector.
Another element of our productivity agenda is using the COAG reform process to remove the duplication that exists between Commonwealth and State regulation and service delivery. As many of you will know, the COAG process is already achieving results, although the hardest work lies ahead.
As the leaders of the Commonwealth public service, there is a challenge for you in progressing this COAG reform agenda. That challenge is to appreciate that we are in a new era of Commonwealth/State cooperation.
While always protecting the Commonwealth's interests, I have a greater expectation that you will work constructively with State and Territory counterparts to achieve lasting reform.
If we get that right, we can deliver a fair deal for the Commonwealth, a fair deal for the States and above all, a great deal for the community.
In addition to lifting productivity growth, the Government is committed to maximising workforce participation, targeting the range of factors that influence workforce participation at different stages of life.
The tax cuts that will come into effect in July are a first step to longer-term tax and welfare reforms to encourage more people into the workforce.
To address the hurdles to participation for women with young children, we are making quality childcare more affordable and more accessible: increasing the child care tax rebate; providing play-based early learning for all 4 year olds, and starting to build child care centres at schools.
Another priority for the Government is to do what we can to address the cost of living pressures on working families.
We have already introduced our transitional amendments to the Workplace Relations Act; we have announced new policy directions on housing affordability; and later this year we will establish a national Fuelwatch scheme as well as receiving the ACCC report on grocery prices.
The Government believes in giving a fair go to all Australians and this is reflected in our policies relating to social inclusion, health care, education, workplace relations and our commitment to close the gap in indigenous life opportunities.
The Government is committed to decisive action on the long-term challenge of climate change, establishing an emissions trading scheme, raising the renewable energy target and ratifying the Kyoto Protocol.
The Government is also committed to a secure Australia  -  strong at home and fully engaged abroad, through what I have described elsewhere as a creative middle power diplomacy.
Finally we are committed to new ways of governing  -  strengthening our independent public institutions (including the APS) and how we can make government more open, accountable and responsive to the needs of the Australian community.
The importance of the APS
The Government therefore has an ambitious policy agenda, with a strong focus on long-term policies rather than simply short-term measures.
The Government is determined to deliver for the working families who have given us this opportunity to build a modern Australia.
The process of policy and program implementation is therefore critically important.
Good policy is one thing.
But good policy without effective program implementation is a dead letter.
The work of the APS is therefore crucially important to the Government.
I understand the vast difference made by good policy design, implementation and service delivery having worked myself at both the Commonwealth and State levels.
Some people like to talk down the public service, and perhaps some graduates are less attracted to the APS because it can't match some of the monetary rewards in parts of the private sector.
You may be surprised to know that at the recently concluded 2020 Summit, a constant theme across the 1,000 delegates was the absolute importance of building an independent, robust and properly remunerated Australian public service.
Just look at the policy challenges that Australia faces over the next decade and beyond.
It's the Australian public service that will lead the nation's response to these great challenges.
The challenge of setting up an emissions trading scheme, and beginning the transformation to becoming a low carbon economy.
The challenge of implementing an education revolution extending from early childhood to schools, apprenticeships, universities and postgraduate research  -  to prepare a new generation with skills and competencies that employers will be looking for decades from now.
The challenge of reshaping Australia's sprawling health care system to meet the demands of an ageing population with changing health problems.
I could mention any number of other challenges, from tackling the nation's water shortages to closing the gap on indigenous life opportunities.
Think even of the opportunities of taking the skills you've developed in the APS and using them to transform lives and futures in struggling nations in the Pacific Rim  -  as 270 APS staff are doing right now, a remarkably important part of Australia's overseas aid program.
Also, our diplomats, together with the ADF, who continue to work in harm's way in places like Baghdad and Kabul.
I would contend that the Australian public service offers the most stimulating and challenging job opportunities that you could imagine. And that's the career environment I would like to create for you  -  our public policy professionals of the future.
A public service that is characterised by excellence  -  by policy innovation, by policy creativity, by policy contestability, by long-term policy planning and by a parallel commitment to excellence and innovation in how we best deliver services to the Australian community.
Australia's long term competitiveness will be shaped by the success of our policies in restoring strong productivity growth, implementing the education revolution, fixing the Federation and responding to climate change.
So let me say very clearly that the Government recognises that we cannot deliver our vision for a modern Australia without an APS that is committed to excellence in policy design, policy implementation and service delivery.
The Government's agenda for the APS
Today I want to discuss seven elements of the Government's vision for the future Australian public service:
     * Reinvigorating the Westminster tradition of an independent public service with merit-based selection processes and continuity of employment when governments change;
     * Building a professionalised public service committed to excellence;
     * Developing evidence-based policy making processes as part of a robust culture of policy contestability;
     * Enhancing the strategic policy capability of the public service;
     * Strengthening the integrity and accountability of government;
     * Broadening participation in government through inclusive policy processes, and
     * A contemporary view of government service delivery that emphasises both efficiency and effectiveness in outcomes.
Reinvigorating the Westminster traditions of independence and continuity
We cannot afford a public service culture where all you do is tell the Government what you think the Government wants to hear.
We cannot afford second-best policy responses to the challenges of climate change, the competitive challenge from the rise of India and China or the need for reform of the Federation.
The Government must receive the best advice, based on the best available information and evidence.
Public servants will not give frank and fearless advice if they think their career prospects or the continuity of their employment rest on them simply echoing a Government's own prejudices.
As you know, the last change of government in 1996 saw many public servants removed from senior positions.
Some people argued that on coming into office, the new Government should take a leaf out of the same book and remove agency heads who were seen as being politically aligned to the previous Government's agenda.
We took a very different view. We made a commitment last year that there'd be no ‘night of the long knives' when we came to office. We said we'd treat the public service differently to the previous government, and we have honoured that commitment.
To build a first class, independent public service, promotion must be based on merit, not on politics.
That is why the Government has strengthened merit-based selection standards for appointments to many senior government appointments such as statutory office holders.
These standards will apply to more than 130 senior positions, including 65 agency heads.
Under these new arrangements there is a formal requirement that all relevant positions must be advertised. The process of assessing applicants must be based on merit, and each process must be overseen by the relevant departmental secretary and the Public Service Commissioner.
Ministers will receive a considered report based on a process that applied merit and openness, and will then have final responsibility for the decision. That is appropriate in a Westminster system, where final accountability rests with the Minister.
Appointments will normally be for five years, so that office holders are not under the constant threat that their contract may not be renewed.
Westminster, by and large, has served our system of government well  -  and the time has come to rebuild the Westminster tradition in Australia.
A professionalised public service
A second element of our reform agenda is to build a highly professional public service.
We need public servants who are talented, hard working and innovative to address the immensely complex public policy challenges ahead.
The Government recognises the long term need to strengthen the capacity of the public service.
We cannot do that overnight.
But we know that the Government cannot deliver on its long-term agenda without a high-quality, professional Australian public service.
And as the Audit Office's report on public sector recruitment this week has highlighted, the APS is facing a challenging environment both for recruitment and retention.
We must build long-term capability and capacity by investing in the APS's leadership, workforce development and organisational development.
I am committed to an Australian public sector that fosters career development and rewards high achievement.
I also want to see more flexible pathways between the public sector and the private sector, research institutions and the community sector. We should also improve mobility between agencies within the APS and between the APS and state public sector agencies.
For years the private sector has poached and plundered talent from the public sector. The APS should equally seek out talent from the private sector.
The public sector leaders of the future could be drawn from the public, private and community sectors.
The leadership groups within the public service should reflect a wide diversity of past work experience. This diversity better enables us to understand the different needs of the Australian community and to develop and deliver better public policy.
That means we need people in the public service with hands-on experience of business, finance, logistics, strategic planning and so on  -  just as we also want people with experience in the third sector of voluntary and community organisations.
We need to accept that talent is more mobile now than in the past. But we don't need to think that just because a talented public servant takes up an opportunity in the private sector - or the community sector - that they won't return to the public service further down the track.
Indeed we should encourage APS staff to spend time working in the private sector, the community sector and in overseas public sector roles, as opportunities to build a broader skill base that can be put to use in the APS in the future.
Evidence-based policy
A third element of the Government's agenda for the public service is to ensure a robust, evidence-based policy making process.
Policy design and policy evaluation should be driven by analysis of all the available options, and not by ideology.
When preparing policy advice for the Government, I expect departments to review relevant developments among State and Territory governments and comparable nations overseas.
The Government will not adopt overseas models uncritically.
We're interested in facts, not fads.
But whether it's aged care, vocational education or disability services, Australian policy development should be informed by the best of overseas experience and analysis.
In fostering a culture of policy innovation, we should trial new approaches and policy options through small-scale pilot studies.
It may be appropriate to collaborate with a State government, a business organisation, a research centre or a community organisation.
It may even be appropriate to cooperate on policy innovation with a government agency overseas, such as we are now doing on climate change with the United Kingdom.
Policy innovation and evidence-based policy making is at the heart of being a reformist government.
Innovation can help us deliver better policy and better outcomes for the whole community.
This means that we want the culture of the APS to foster new ideas and new directions - and not to let the narrow interests of particular branches or agencies stand in the way of innovation.
Enhancing strategic policy capabilities
One important feature of the priorities that I've discussed this morning is the long-term nature of many of Australia's key policy challenges.
For the APS to deliver on the Government's long term reform agenda, we will need to invest in a greater strategic policy capability.
By this I mean a greater capacity to see emerging challenges and opportunities  -  and to see them not just from the perspective of government, but also from the perspective of all parts of the community.
Strategic policy development is especially important at the level of the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet, which should play a whole-of-government, forward-looking role in policy development, as well as carefully thinking through implementation issues, and taking corrective action when policies are not working.
PM&amp;C's role is to support the development and delivery of policy across all of government. In doing so, I expect it to work collaboratively with the entire APS so that we genuinely deliver ‘joined up' government.
As Prime Minister most of my interactions with the APS occur through my Department. My expectations of PM&amp;C are:
     * timely, well-argued, robust and forward looking policy advice;
     * a coordination role, particularly through the Cabinet process, and
     * supporting the implementation of key government programs.
I know this has been a matter of debate in recent years, but I hold the firm view that your job is not just to advise on the day to day issues as they arise. You should also be providing long-term strategic advice to assist the Government in developing its policy direction.
The public service must have the systems in place to tackle the hard issues that present challenges across portfolios, across departments, across governments and across generations.
Of course, the Government is ultimately responsible for decision making. Once a decision is taken, the task of the public service changes to ensuring effective implementation and service delivery.
And this is as important as the decision itself.
Inclusive and innovative government
A fifth element of the Government's agenda for the APS is to encourage wider participation in the processes of government from all parts of the community.
By engaging the community more broadly we can understand better how government policies impact families, individuals, communities and businesses.
This can help us with the challenge of making the different parts of government join up, and ensure that services are not just delivered efficiently from the Government's perspective, but effectively from the citizen's perspective.
One of our challenges is to find ways to harness the best ideas from Australians of all backgrounds and all ages.
The Australia 2020 Summit showed that many Australians are keen to participate in the policy process.
A more inclusive policy process means engaging average Australians as well as experts, think tanks and business and community groups in policy development and delivery. Many parts of the APS already have good processes of community engagement on which we can build.
This more inclusive approach extends to policy implementation and service delivery.
Australians increasingly expect a more personalised service when they deal with large organisations, whether businesses or government agencies. Government agencies must meet those expectations.
This also means cultivating a genuine spirit of public service on the front line of service delivery.
Much of the best innovation will be driven from the front line of service delivery, and we need ways to capture feedback from the front line where public servants interact with people.
The responsibility of capturing this information and feeding it back into the policy process will largely rest with you.
Integrity and accountability
The sixth element of the Government's agenda for the APS is rebuilding a culture of accountability across all levels of government.
The Government has begun that with the Standards of Ministerial Ethics, the Register of Lobbyists, and the Lobbying Code of Conduct.
I have also foreshadowed my intention to introduce new codes of conduct relating to ministerial staff.
Just as these high standards apply to ministers and their offices, I similarly expect the public service to comply with the APS Values and Code of Conduct and the Public Service Act.
The Government will also be enhancing the culture of transparency in government through reforms to Freedom of Information laws, including the abolition of conclusive certificates and the creation of a Freedom of Information Commissioner.
A contemporary view of government service delivery
The final aspect of the Government's agenda for the public service is that we have a contemporary view of the role of the state in service delivery.
I do not have an ideological preference for the public sector, nor for the private sector. The question of how services are best delivered has not been resolved conclusively in favour of either the market or the state.
In some instances, the public sector may provide services that are of better quality, are more accessible, or that come at a lower cost.
In other instances, private or community sector provision may reflect a better use of limited public resources.
Service delivery should be contestable, and decisions about the mix of the public and private sectors should be based on the available evidence on how to deliver services efficiently and effectively.
This means that we will sometimes support services being delivered by those outside of the public sector, but with the proviso that we examine all of the costs and benefits of service delivery options.
As many private sector businesses have concluded, outsourcing can sometimes be a false economy because it can hollow out an organisation's important technical skills and know-how, to its long term detriment.
Corporate memory is important, especially in government, and we should ensure that it is not diminished by short-term assessments of the costs and benefits of how we implement decisions and deliver services.
Conclusion
Australia has been profoundly shaped by the great public servants of the past.
Just think of the extraordinary contribution made to successive governments  -  and more importantly, to Australia - by H.C. Coombs, or ‘Nugget' Coombs as he was universally known.
For five decades from the late 1930s, Nugget served as an economist; as the first Governor of the Reserve Bank; as an architect of a new approach to indigenous affairs, and as a source of advice for successive Prime Ministers of all political persuasions.
He worked directly with Prime Ministers Curtin, Chifley, Menzies, Holt, Gorton, McMahon and Whitlam.
One reflection of his extraordinary contribution is the effusive letters of thanks that were written to him by Prime Ministers Menzies and Whitlam.
After his retirement as Governor of the Reserve Bank, Sir Robert Menzies wrote to thank him for being:
“a man of the most conspicuous ability and of the most shining integrity... [I] have benefited so much from your great services to our country.”
Some years later, Gough Whitlam also wrote to thank Nugget for his contribution to the Whitlam Government's achievements relating to indigenous affairs, the arts, the public service and the public sector:
“[T]he fact that these achievements will endure and make a permanent impression on Australian society is due primarily to your dedication and skill and lofty sense of duty. I thank you for all you have done.” 
Nugget Coombs' career shows that independence, excellence and absolute integrity can all go together.
Nugget's concluding thoughts in his autobiography are perhaps more sharp and relevant today than even when he wrote them almost thirty years ago:
“Perhaps the young and idealistic recruits to Australian Government bureaucracies who sometimes must despair of finding scope for either their abilities or their idealism may find some comfort in the evidence the letters and other aspects of this story provide, that mutually rewarding relationships between Ministers and their official and unofficial advisers exist more often than one would be led to believe by media comment or some aspects of recent political history.”
I hope we can see a new generation of public servants with the spirit of Nugget Coombs.
I look forward to a strong, constructive partnership between the APS and the Government that I lead.
It will sometimes be demanding, sometimes frustrating, and sometimes exhilarating.
But I hope, it will always be rewarding in the role that you play in shaping Australia's future.
I hope that you will each be able to take great pride in your work and the work of your agencies in the months and years ahead.
And I look forward to what we can do together  -  to equip Australia to deal with the challenges of the 21st century.


It is a great pleasure to be here today to open officially the new Medical School at Deakin University.
Before I begin my remarks this morning I want to acknowledge the grief and suffering of those affected by the tragic boat collision on Sydney harbour early this morning.
The harbour is the centre of so much of Sydney life.
It is terrible to think of it today as a place of suffering and death.
News like this is just every parent's worst nightmare.
We are thinking of the parents, families and friends of the five young people who lost their lives, and the nine who were injured.
Awful events like this are also a reminder of how much we rely on the training and special skills of the men and women of our emergency services and medical professions  -  the reason why we're here today at Deakin University.
Deakin University has a proud record as Victoria's first major regional university.
It has grown remarkably since it was established in the 1970s to a student population of 34,000 now, including around 7,000 international students studying here in Australia or throughout the world.
And this campus shows that remarkable growth.
Waurn Ponds was once the outskirts of Geelong  -  now it is the centre of a growth area.
Deakin University has made a contribution beyond education to Geelong, its surrounding districts and throughout Western Victoria.
I am sure that Alfred Deakin  -  one of the architects of the Australian Federation  -  would be proud to be associated with your great institution.
I would like to congratulate all of the staff and students of Deakin University on what you have already achieved, even as you are about to take the next step with the official opening of the Medical School.
I can claim a close personal link to the health professions.
My mother trained as a nurse.
So did my sister and one of my brothers.
In fact, I am the one who let the family tradition down  -  the one that did not make it into the health care profession, beyond a short stint as a wardsman in Canterbury Hospital in the ‘70s.
But coming from a family of nurses I have always had lots of views put to me about the importance of healthcare.
[And particularly I've been told many times how it's the nurses who hold the whole system together.]
Health Care
Australia's health care system is under pressures from many sources.
The health needs of our population are changing, as people live longer lives.
Chronic disease rates are rising dramatically.
The costs of new technologies and treatments are very substantial.
And the provision of health care is becoming more complex, especially with the long term management of illnesses becoming increasingly central to the health system.
Australia's health care system is not ready for the challenges ahead, and that is why the Government is committed to health reform.
We have committed more funds, but that is only part of the answer.
We have also begun to work with the state and territory governments to end the blame game about who is responsible for shortcomings in the health system.
We want to work with the state governments to make the system work.
I want to congratulate the Victorian Government for its support for the Deakin University Medical School.
We also want to get the best ideas into the health system and that means being open to new ideas.
That is why we made a long-term plan for health care one of the ten streams we focused on at the 2020 Summit.
We heard of ideas like the proposal for a “Healthbook” that might look a bit like a FaceBook website.
It could be a place for Australians to take control of their own medical records.
They could grant access to those records to their medical professionals  -  doctors, physiotherapists, other health professionals.
At its best, it could give people control over their own medical records.
It is part of the idea discussed at the 2020 Summit of putting the patient at the centre of the health system.
New ideas like this take time to progress, as there are many aspects to be considered.
But I am confident that this sort of thinking can make our health system even better  -  more responsive  -  in the future.
In the meantime, we are moving ahead with the major immediate challenges in improving our health care system.
Health Policy
The Government believes that every Australian has the right to live their life in good health and access the best possible health care when they need it.
That means we have a new focus on prevention  -  on giving people the tools and knowledge to make good health decisions.
It also means defending and strengthening our public hospital system, as the foundation of our dual system.
And it means constantly improving the skills of the health workforce  -  a challenge for the long-term.
I want to see a quality health system that provides access to all Australians, regardless of what they earn or where they live.
That is why we are investing over half-a-billion dollars in targeted rural health programs this year.
Having grown up in rural Queensland I understand the importance of access to health care for all people.
A key part of the improving access to health care in rural and regional communities is improving the health of Indigenous Australians.
The health gap between the Indigenous and non-Indigenous communities in Australia is unacceptable.
Higher infant mortality rates and shorter life expectancy for Indigenous Australians is inexcusable.
But we need to do more to bridge this gap.
The Council of Australian Governments (COAG) has committed to a partnership among all levels of government to work with Indigenous communities to address Indigenous disadvantage.
We have committed to closing the life expectancy gap within a generation and halving the mortality gap for children under five within a decade.
I also announced recently that every year when Parliament begins I will present a report on progress in closing the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australia  -  particularly the health gap.
It is a way to make sure that we stay focused on improving the health situation for Indigenous communities.
The Health Workforce
One key element for achieving our vision of a better health system is having the right health workforce.
That means more doctors.
I know that in training more doctors we face the challenge of providing quality clinical training  -  something I know you have been working collaboratively on with the other Victorian Medical Deans.
Having the right health workforce  -  one with an appreciation of the importance of regional, rural and Indigenous health problems  -  will be an important part of improving access to health care for rural Australians.
I am pleased to offer my support for Deakin University Medical School and its strong commitment to these areas.
Your course will help develop a new generation of doctors with a strong understanding of the needs of rural communities, of the needs of our indigenous communities and of the challenging role played by health care professionals in regional communities  -  either as general practitioners or as specialists.
It will develop a new generation of doctors with a focus on health promotion and prevention.
A new generation of doctors that will play an important part in meeting the health needs of our nation.
To offer further support to Deakin University I am pleased to announce today that the Australian Government will provide one million dollars to support key rural academic appointments at Deakin's new Medical School.
This funding is part of our response to a newly released audit report which has confirmed that the supply of health professionals in many rural and regional centres is low to very poor.
We want to support Deakin University Medical School's innovative rural training program which will place medical students at training sites in south-western Victoria, including hubs at Ballarat and Warrnambool.
The funding will allow the University to make a number of crucial rural appointments to help with preparations for clinical training for the University's first cohort of medical students.
Conclusion
The Australian Government is committed to health care reform and meeting the changing health needs of an ageing population into the future.
We are committed to bringing new ideas into the health policy debate.
We are committed to working with state governments, with health professionals and the wider community to delivering the best health outcomes possible.
And we are committed to supporting the training of new health care professionals.
I am pleased to say the Deakin University and its new Medical School are important partners for us.
I want to congratulate the University on its new school.
I want to congratulate all those who have supported the establishment of the school  -  federal, state and local politicians, local community leaders and the private sector.
I want to congratulate the staff and faculty and wish you all the best for your first year.
And I want to congratulate the students of 2008 for being the trailblazers for this new course.
It is my great pleasure to open formally Deakin University's Medical School.


Thank you for the invitation to address the Housing Industry Association.
The HIA's annual D.R. Dossetor Address pays tribute to one of the fathers of the Australian housing industry.
Few Australians did more to pursue the dream of universal home ownership than Randal Dossetor.
He was a key figure in the Builders and Allied Trades Association (BATA) and instrumental in the formation of the HIA.
Randal Dossetor's generation was the first generation of Australians to embrace mass home ownership.
For those that had grown up in the depression, home ownership was a rock of security  -  a roof over their heads that could not be taken away.
For those that had returned from war, home ownership was the tangible realisation of the freedom for which they had fought for.
For those post war immigrants that had travelled across the world to make a new life for themselves, home ownership was a stake in Australia  -  proof that they had established a foothold in their new homeland.
In the post-war period home ownership became an important part of the Great Australian Dream. The suburban quarter acre block with a hills hoist, a BBQ and a shed became an iconic Australian image.
The objective of our Government is to continue and strengthen the great Australian dream of home ownership. It is to move Australia closer towards a home-owning democracy.
Our Government's goal is to expand the number of homes and to expand the number of home owners.
Before explaining our housing policy in great detail, let me outline the economic policy framework within which we operate.
The Economic Context
The new Australian Government is committed to building a modern, competitive Australia capable of meeting the challenges of the 21st century  -  to secure the nation's future and the future for working families.
We are committed to developing policies beyond the next electoral cycle; policies which face up to our long term problems, and secure our long term future.
And we are committed to policies which build a strong economy that delivers for working families.
Building a strong economy means:
     * Responsible economic management at a time of global economic uncertainty.
     * Investing in long-term productivity growth by dealing with the long-term neglect of our predecessors in skills, infrastructure and business deregulation.
     * Waging a war against inflation by reining in government spending to put downward pressure on interest rates.
But the Government is equally committed to an economy that delivers for working families under financial pressure.
Responsible economic management must do both: build the overall strength of the economy while doing whatever we can to assist families under financial pressure.
Working Families Under Financial Pressure
The cost of living is rising more rapidly than it has in more than a decade.
Last week inflation hit 4.2 per cent on a year-end basis.
This comes on the back of the Government inheriting from our predecessors the highest inflation rate in 16 years.
Now we in Government spend a lot of time pouring over the figures.
But let me tell you in practical terms what high inflation of this nature means for household budgets.
Over the past year, food costs have risen 5.7 per cent, mainly due to increases in a broad range of household groceries.
For example, a litre of milk has gone up 11.6 per cent over the past year.
A loaf of bread is now 9 per cent more expensive than it was 12 months ago.
The cost of filling up the family car now costs 18.9 per cent more than it did a year ago. That's nearly 20 cents in the dollar.
Health costs have risen 4.6 per cent over the past year, mainly due to an increase in net hospital and medical services rising 5.5 per cent.
Over the past 12 months education costs have increased by 4.3 per cent.
And where the rubber really hits the road for many families is the fact that they have now had to deal with 12 interest rate rises in a row.
And it is the role of government to do everything within its power to provide relief from this pressure.
The job of our government in this Budget is to place maximum downward pressure on inflation and, therefore, interest rates.
The RBA is seeking to counter inflation by raising interest rates and thereby reducing overall spending in the economy.
The Government must cut spending too  -  because if Government spending continues to increase at the same rate as under our predecessors, it will put further pressure on inflation and interest rates.
That's why a budget surplus based on real cuts in government spending is necessary to reduce some of the pressure on working families from high interest rates.
I have said before there is no silver bullet we can use to relieve financial pressure on families.
But where we can act, we must act.
We, as a government, must tighten our belt.
We must engage in responsible spending.
We must reprioritise current government spending.
And that is what we will be doing in the upcoming Budget.
The Budget begins a new era of responsible economic management
Prior to the election, I committed to conservative economic management through producing budget surpluses across the economic cycle.
In this Budget we will honour that commitment  -  although that will mean making cuts to a number of existing government programs.
We have set a target of delivering a surplus of at least 1.5 per cent of GDP to help fight inflation and place downward pressure on interest rates.
Our predecessors set a target considerably less than that for the upcoming financial year.
This Budget will also be a down payment on Australia's long term future.
We will take up the challenge to provide new long term economic leadership for Australia, in key areas like education and health.
We will develop new solutions to Australia's big future challenges like climate change, the ageing population and the rise of India and China.
These were areas of policy neglect by our predecessors.
We intend to deal with this neglect by acting in the nation's long-term interests.
Finally this budget will also support working families under financial pressure.
We promised to support working families and we'll do that in this Budget
Some economic commentators say we shouldn't be delivering tax cuts to working families, but we understand the pressure they are under.
Our message is clear and simple: there are tax cuts in the Government's Budget for one simple reason  -  family budgets are under real financial pressure.
Therefore, as we frame this Budget, we must do three things:
     * Wage a continuing war against inflation;
     * Invest in the nation's future; and
     * Provide support to working families under financial pressure in the here and now.
And all along, ensuring that we keep a weather eye on unfolding global economic circumstances and maintaining a fiscal position that provides flexibility to deal any unforeseen challenges that may arise.
The Housing Affordability Challenge
We are committed to expanding affordable housing as part of our larger goal of restoring economic opportunity and a sense of security to working families who are trying to build secure lives for themselves.
Accessible, high quality housing is central to our vision for Australia's future.
Our ambition is for Australia to be a home-owning society, to extend the opportunity of home ownership to as many people as possible, and to provide high quality, safe, secure homes for those who aren't yet in a position to own their own home.
A place to call home is fundamental to Australian values.
The home is the physical foundation of the family. It is a base from which we raise our children, be part of a community, and build a career.
Home ownership is not just about ensuring that people have a place to live. Homes are also financial assets. For many Australians their home is their largest asset, accounting for on average 55 per cent of wealth.
Owning a home gives us the certainty of a roof over our heads when we retire, making it a little easier to live on the pension.
A few months ago I received a letter from a woman from the town of Woodford  -  about 70km north-west of Brisbane.
She was evidently a hard working single mother with two children still at home. She wrote that she currently does ten hour shifts at a laundry and could “never think of sitting at home and not working.”
But because of the costs of her two sons' education, their bus tickets, and the rising price of fuel, she was slipping further and further away from her dream of saving for a home deposit.
She wrote “I wanted to send you this letter to ask you for some help with the housing problem, not only for me but all the other families who struggle week to week in our tiny town.”
I remember what it is like to feel the sense of security that comes with home ownership.
My mother first bought our family home in Nambour shortly after my thirteenth birthday.
For our family, that home was a source of pride; a weight off our minds; and sense of security.
For the same reasons, owning a home is of deep personal importance to many Australians.
It is our commitment to working families that makes us so determined to act where we can on Australia's housing crisis.
One of the most significant pressures on working families is the rising cost of housing.
Consider the facts:
     * In the last twelve years the median house price in Australia has risen by 200 per cent, compared with an increase of a little over 35 per cent in the CPI.
     * In 1996, the average home cost four times the average annual wage. A decade later the average home cost seven times the average annual wage.
     * In the past decade, the size of the average first home buyer mortgage has more than doubled  -  from $107,000 to $228,000 at the start of this year.
     * To buy an average priced home you now need a six figure salary to service the loan.
     * In 1996, the mortgage repayments on an average loan soaked up 17.9 per cent of average household income. By the end of 2007, mortgage repayments on an average loan soaked up 32.3 per cent of average household income. That is an increase from around one in six dollars going on the mortgage to almost one in three dollars.
     * Among low and middle income families alone, there are some 1.1 million families in housing stress  -  that is who are in the bottom 40 per cent of income earners spending more than 30 per cent of disposable incomes on housing. This is 220,000 more families than in 2004  -  an increase of a quarter in just three years.
Home ownership for many these days is as much stress as it is security.
Each 25 basis point costs a household with an average mortgage an extra $58 per month. Thus is it likely that households now face an extra $5,000 a year as a direct result of the interest rate rises on an average property over the last two years.
The consequence of housing stress is working families under pressure.
It also means fewer home owners  -  and more people stuck in the rental trap.
This means a tighter rental market.
That means fewer places to rent and higher rents.
The Real Estate Institute of Australia reports that rental vacancy rates have now slipped below 3 per cent in every capital city.
Rents are rising quickly. In the past year newly negotiated rents rose by about 13 per cent.
Causes of Declining Affordability
At the core, the main reason for the growing housing affordability problem is that there have simply not been enough houses being built to meet the demand for housing.
Just this week, the Housing Industry Association released its March Quarter National Outlook.
It makes for sober reading.
According to economists at the HIA, the forecast number of new dwellings, ‘housing starts', for 2007-08 is just 154,000.
This is only marginally higher than that recorded for the previous two years.
And is still well below the 170,000 housing starts recorded in 2002-03 and 2003-04.
In 2007-08, according to the HIA, the ‘underlying requirement' for new dwellings based on population growth was at least 170,000.
That means we have had a shortage of 15,000 homes for this financial year alone.
According to the HIA, in 2008-09, as a result of interest rate increases, we're expecting to build an extra 154,000 new homes.
It is not until 2009-10, that low affordability and announced new housing policies are expected to see a noticeable increase in housing starts.
The Government's Housing Policy Initiatives
The new Government has an ambitious housing policy agenda.
After more than a decade of neglect, this country needs one.
We now have a Housing Minister, Tanya Plibersek backed up by Departmental capacity in the Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs.
The previous Government didn't have a Housing Department.
The previous Government did not even have a Housing Minister.
We've also got clear goals to drive policy making:
     * We want more Australians to own their own home.
     * We want enough housing supply to meet demand.
     * We want first home buyers to have bigger deposits when they buy a home.
     * We want a more affordable rental market that attracts private sector investment.
     * We want to reform the system of public and community housing.
     * And we want to halve the rate of homelessness.
While we are, of course, taking a very disciplined approach to public spending in this budget  -  to put downward pressure on inflation and interest rates  -  we are introducing more new housing policies than any budget in living memory.
The 2008 Budget will include a significant package to tackle the housing crisis.
It includes measures to make saving easier, to cut housing costs, to increase the number of affordable rental properties, and to build homes for homeless people.
This new assault on the housing crisis is in addition to existing measures, such as Rent Assistance and First Home Owner's Grant.
As we move into the second half of the year, we will also be re-writing the book on social housing policy in this country.
The Council of Australian Governments, where the Federal and State Governments negotiate responsibilities and funding arrangements, is knuckling down to deal with the public housing challenge.
The old Commonwealth State Housing Agreement will be replaced with a more comprehensive and streamlined National Affordable Housing Agreement.
The new Agreement will bring together all housing assistance programs including Commonwealth Rent Assistance, the First Home Owners Grant and homelessness programs to create more affordable housing for those who need it.
National Housing Supply Council
The first housing policy commitment we made last year was to establish a National Housing Supply Council.
This Council will be the chief adviser to the Federal Government about housing demand and supply in this country.
We are establishing this body in recognition of the simple fact that Australia cannot address housing affordability without building more houses.
In the last three years alone, we've added almost a million people to Australia's population.
These people have to live somewhere.
And as the figures I cited earlier demonstrate, we simply haven't built enough houses in recent years.
That's why our policy measures are so focused on the supply-side of the housing affordability equation.
The truth is that no-one has been asking the question of how many houses we need, of what kind, and in which locations, for over a decade.
The Council will publish an annual State of Supply report to analyse the adequacy of construction and land supply for the next 20 years.
The Council will bring together information:
     * On the demand side: demographic data about population growth, immigration and settlement; and information about household formation and changing housing preferences for an ageing population and to meet the challenges of climate change
     * on the supply side: land release and availability, planning frameworks and the impact of infrastructure projects.
Industry has information and direct experience in key areas such as skills availability and access to materials.
Currently no-one pulls all of this together to provide clear advice and forecasts so that we can get housing supply right.
The Minister for Housing, Tanya Plibersek, last week announced Dr Owen Donald as Chair of the National Housing Supply Council.
Dr Donald is a former Executive Director of Housing in Victoria and the first Executive Director of the Australian Housing and Urban Research Institute  -  AHURI.
Today, I am pleased to announce that Dr Donald will be supported by a first class team of housing advisers, with expertise in construction, skills, planning and urban development.
The members will include three property industry experts who are here with us today:
     * Former Manager Director of Australand, Brendan Crotty
     * Managing Director of Wilson Homes and HIA Board member, Stuart Wilson; and
     * The HIA's Policy Chief Executive, Chris Lamont.
Welcome aboard.
Other expert members of the council will include:
     * ANZ Chief Economist, Saul Eslake
     * Former Director General of Planning NSW, Sue Holliday
     * SGS Economics Director, Marcus Spiller
     * WA Urban Development Coordinator, Marion Thompson; and
     * University of Sydney, Associate Professor Judy Yates
I am looking forward to the first State of Supply report in January next year.
It will greatly assist in making sure housing supply catches up with demand over time.
If the HIA analysis is right, we already have a housing deficit in the tens of thousands, and it will get worse in coming years as the annual underlying requirement for housing is going to rise above 175,000 a year.
Based on these numbers from the HIA, over the next six years or so, this country is going to have to build an additional one million new homes.
That won't solve housing affordability  -  but it will make a difference.
Building an extra million homes will require a huge effort and considerable resources.
Aside from what Governments do, it will require a huge construction project.
We'll need more land.
That's why the Commonwealth, State and Territory Governments are conducting a land audit to facilitate improved housing supply by identifying surplus land for possible release for housing development.
Skilled Workers
We'll also need more workers.
As the housing industry has argued, we can't build more houses without more skilled workers to build them.
Under the previous Government skill shortages in many industries  -  but especially residential construction  -  were neglected.
According to the Housing Industry Association, we will need an additional 20,000 skilled tradespeople over the next three years alone if we are going to build the houses that we need.
The new Government is acting urgently to address the skill shortages by training Australians.
The Government is going to deliver an additional 450,000 training places over the next four years.
We have already fast tracked 20,000 new training places in areas of skills shortages.
We've also established Skills Australia, which will advise the government on skill shortages across the economy.
Today I am pleased to announce that at its first meeting later this month, Skills Australia will consider as a matter of priority the specific needs of the residential construction sector and work towards quantifying what proportion of the 450,000 places this sector needs for the long term.
The HIA has also argued that migration is part of the answer.
The Government acted earlier this year to increase the permanent skilled migration target for 2007-08 by 6000 places, as an immediate response to the skills crisis.
Alongside the permanent skilled migration program, the temporary (457) visa program has also continued to grow strongly and is likely to reach 105,000 in 2007-08.
This is a start because we've listened to the needs of industry and business for who labour shortages are a real concern.
To date the numbers of people coming in through migration programs to work in the residential construction sector have been relatively low and we need to do more to attract skills into the sector.
Housing Affordability Fund
The 2008 Budget will include a $500 million Housing Affordability Fund to drive housing construction activity.
The Fund will be used to address two components of house costs: infrastructure charges and levies and ‘holding costs' caused by planning delays.
It has been estimated that housing linked infrastructure charges can add up to $68,000 on a new home in some parts of suburban Australia.
Those charges pay for all sorts of important infrastructure like water, sewerage, transport, and parklands.
But when these charges they are passed on to the homebuyer, it can push the dream of owning a new home out of reach.
The Housing Affordability Fund will form a partnership between the Commonwealth and local governments  -  to invest in this infrastructure to reduce the cost of new homes.
Another part of the equation is ‘holding costs'  -  costs associated with planning and approval delays such as interest, land taxes, council rates and staff costs.
These too can add tens of thousands to the cost of a home.
Our partnership with local government will also address the need to streamline planning and approvals processes to reduce the cost of homes.
First Home Saver Accounts
Our biggest new housing investment in the upcoming Budget is the establishment of First Home Saver Accounts.
Over the next four years, the Commonwealth will invest around $1 billion in these special accounts to help people save a deposit for a house.
If a person sets aside a proportion of their income to the account it receives a government co-contribution.
And when it is growing with interest inside the account, it is taxed at the low superannuation rate.
Our analysis shows that a couple on average wages putting aside 10 per cent of their incomes for their first home, could be able to save a deposit of up to $80,000, depending on returns. This is considerably more than if they held the money in a normal bank account.
The Accounts also support national savings. We estimate that the Accounts will contribute around $4 billion to national savings within four years.
In recent months, the Treasurer has been consulting closely with the financial services sector to make sure we get the details right and have the necessary legislation in place by the end of the financial year.
National Rental Affordability Scheme
Another ambitious commitment is our National Rental Affordability Scheme.
This Scheme aims to create a new asset class for institutional investors in affordable residential housing.
The Scheme will provide an annual incentive to institutional investors to build new homes and rent them to low and moderate income earners at 20 per cent below market rates.
The Australian Government will provide institutional investors with an annual $6,000 refundable tax credit for new buildings.
State and Territory Governments have agreed to contribute at least $2,000 per annum in cash or in kind for each home.
Each property will attract this subsidy for 10 years, at which time the property may be rented at market rates or sold.
In the first five years the Government aims to bring 50,000 properties on line.
If there continues to be demand, the Government will expand the Scheme to 100,000 properties over the following five years  -  a major new investment in Australia's affordable housing stock.
I expect new partnerships to emerge between institutional investors, property developers and community housing agencies.
Today I am pleased to announced the release of a Rental Affordability Scheme Technical Paper for investors, developers and broader housing industry.
The Technical Paper sets out the key features and operating conditions of the Scheme.
We propose delivering the Scheme in two phases: an Establishment Phase  -  allocating 11,000 incentives for dwellings built over next two years. And an Expansion Phase  -  allocating 39,000 incentives for dwellings built from 2010 to 2012.
In early June we will release National Eligibility Criteria for projects under the Scheme.
At the end of June we will put out our first call for Expressions of Interest under the Scheme.
By the end of this year we expect to put out two further calls for Expressions of Interest for projects which will attract the incentive.
With rents rising and working families under pressure, we have no time to waste.
Conclusion
Let me finish where I began.
In the 1950s the precursor to the HIA, the Builders and Allied Trades Association (BATA) was established to promote housing industry and build a new generation of homes for a new generation of Australians.
In the post-war years, Australia benefited from a significant commodities boom. But at the same time the nation faced high inflation and an acute housing shortage.
The paradox of the 1950s economic boom was that the persistent housing shortage meant that even though the country was getting richer, the dream of home ownership was receding out of the reach of many Australians.
There are obvious parallels to today.
The objective of our government is to tackle inflation, take some of the pressure off working families, and to do what is possible to make home ownership affordable.
So that young people can realistically aspire to own their own home.
So that young families can once again see their home as a source of security rather than a source of financial stress.
There is no silver bullet to Australia's housing shortage, but it is the role of government to do everything within its power to provide relief from this pressure.
After all, it's working families that have made Australia the country that it is today.
I don't have to tell this audience that a big part of the realisation of these ambitions lies in our ability to build more homes.
That's where you come in.
This government wants to continue to support you in your vocation, your business, your profession. We want you to be building Australian homes.
We want the HIA, in the spirit of Randal Dossetor, to continue its work to make the Great Australian Dream a reality for more and more Australian families into the 21st century.
It is part of building a stronger, fairer Australia for the future.


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet and whose culture we celebrate as one of the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
I acknowledge the women and men of the great Australian labour movement.
And I acknowledge this great branch of the Australian Labor Party  -  this branch so crucial in forming this Australian Labor Government.
I acknowledge the contribution of our rank and file members and supporters in every division right across this State in adding 10 new members to the Federal Parliamentary Labor Party.
Jason Clare in Blaxland.
Greg Combet in Charlton.
Mike Kelly in Eden-Monaro.
Craig Thompson in Dobell.
Belinda Neal in Robertson.
Bob Debus in Macquarie.
David Bradbury in Lindsay.
Janelle Saffin in Page.
Maxine McKew in Bennelong.
And in the Senate, a bloke who goes by the name of Mark Arbib  -  who is now in the process of reading and memorising that classic thriller called Standing Orders of the Senate.
I congratulate all those candidates and their supporters who came close but who in the end didn't get over the line.
This happened to me in my first election and my exhortation to all our people on the ground is simple: stay the course, ours is a course worth fighting for.
I want to congratulate Karl Bitar on his elevation to General Secretary.
I hear it's been a quiet start for Karl at this conference.
I thank Premier Morris Iemma and his government for their cooperative approach with the Federal Government in our combined efforts to begin the long process of reforming the Federation.
And I thank the members of our industrial movement, under the leadership of Unions NSW, who dedicated this blood, sweat and tears to the campaign of 2007 in defence of Australia's working families.
And it is with pride that I now address you as the 26th Prime Minister of Australia.
Sixty years ago, the 16th Prime Minister of Australia also addressed this NSW conference.
At the 1948 NSW State conference Ben Chifley, the son of Bathurst, son of NSW, and son of Australia, said to the delegates of that conference:
 “The problem that we have set out to right is in seeing that all the community are in a position to have a decent standard of living. That is the ultimate goal of the Labour movement whatever the reversals in that long, long road. That is the task, after all, that we have set ourselves. 
The Labour movement can only be great... by the united efforts of all those who believe in it, of individuals who are not in it to get out of it something personal, but in it because it is a great political party designed to bring all the community a fair share of the things the world is capable of giving them...
 These things are really worth fighting for.”
 Ben Chifley, the railwayman, reminded us then as he reminds us now, that this party and this movement have a great responsibility to this nation.
And what is that responsibility: 
     * to plan for the future;
     * to reform for the future;
     * to build for the future;
     * always applying our continuing commitment to the great Australian value of a fair go for all;
     * always striving to provide a decent life for all Australians (not just for some), and
     * beyond that, striving also to make this nation Australia an even greater force for good in the world.
     * To embody therefore in our work Ben Chifley's great vision of a ‘light on the hill'
Ben Chifley was a planner, a reformer and a builder:
     * From 1942 he planned post-war reconstruction;
     * He established comprehensive soldier re-settlement schemes;
     * He gave all returning soldiers an entitlement to vocational education;
     * He launched Australia's post-war immigration program;
     * He established the Commonwealth/State housing agreement;
     * He introduced free hospital treatment and (against trenchant opposition) a Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme;
     * He supported the establishment of the Australian motor vehicle industry;
     * He launched the Snowy Mountains hydroelectric scheme;
     * He established the Australian National University.
But Chif' wasn't just active on the home front.
Chif also recognised Australia's responsibilities abroad.
     * He steered Australia through the last tumultuous years of the War that threatened our very survival as a nation;
     * He prevailed in the party's internal debate on ratifying the Bretton Woods Agreement establishing the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund because we had to be part of the global economic system, not removed from it;
     * Together with Evatt, he framed Australia's role at the San Francisco conference in the formation of the United Nations;
     * He despatched Evatt to chair the United Nations Special Commission on Palestine, and
     * He helped broker the independence of the Indonesian republic from the Dutch.
Chif was no slouch.
All this was done in five years.
Chif believed that we had to seize the day.
Not simply drifting into the future, but actively shaping the future.
Exerting our every effort to direct the future rather than standing idly by while the future is simply allowed to direct us.
The Mission of the new Australian Government
That's why the mission of the new Australian Government is to build a modern Australia, capable of meeting the challenges of the 21st century  -  to secure the nation's future, as well as securing the future for the nation's families.
For the economy, that means building a globally competitive Australia based on a productivity revolution, so that we don't fall behind the rest of the world.
That in turn means an education revolution as part of a single galvanising vision to create the best educated, best trained, best skilled workforce in the world.
That means the national government taking the lead on national infrastructure  -  rather than just bleating about the States.
That means reforming the Federation  -  rather than simply perpetuating the blame game  -  because the Australian people have had an absolute gutful of the blame game and Australian businesses want us to lead the nation towards a long term goal of a seamless national economy.
That means reforming our nation's health and hospitals system.
That means working together to close the gap between indigenous and non-indigenous Australia.
That means rather than just hoping that climate change will go away, stepping up to the plate and acting on climate change both at home and abroad.
And it means, once again, Australia resuming our proper place in the councils of the region and the world where our voice very simply has been too silent for too long.
Our responsibilities to the nation are therefore great.
Just as the nation's expectations of us are great.
And that is why we must dedicate our heart and soul and strength to the task that is now at hand.
Our achievements so far
We have been in office barely five months.
And we've not exactly been sitting on our dig.
     * Within minutes of taking office, the Government signed the instruments to ratify the Kyoto Protocol and we are now active participants in the Bali Roadmap on climate change.
     * On the first day of Parliamentary business, I extended an apology to the stolen generations of Indigenous Australians, and we have begun a policy program of closing the obscene gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous life opportunities in Australia.
     * In the first legislation placed before the new Parliament the Government abolished AWAs. We've introduced the Transition Act; we've released our draft National Employment Standards, and we've begun the process of modernising industrial awards.
     * The Government has also embraced a comprehensive productivity agenda based on a new program of microeconomic reform. It begins with early childhood education, continuing with computers and trades training centres in every secondary school, 450,000 new training places and thousands of new university scholarships, along with the introduction of Skills Australia to spearhead our response to skills shortages.
     * The Government has also enacted legislation to establish Infrastructure Australia, and has begun the implementation of our national broadband network to bring Australia fully into the digital economy of the 21st century.
     * The Government has commenced a new era in Commonwealth/State relations through the COAG reform process - to reform the Federation, to remove the unnecessary regulatory burdens on business and to begin building a seamless national economy.
     * The Government has taken action to improve health outcomes by immediately investing $650 million in our public hospitals to reverse the trend decline in the Commonwealth funding share and start an immediate blitz on elective surgery waiting lists, while also establishing the National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission to develop a long term national health reform plan.
     * The Government has appointed the Commonwealth's first Housing Minister in twelve years and has announced its intention to implement a new National First Home Savers Account; a new National Rental Affordability Scheme, together with a new Housing Affordability Fund to help reduce infrastructure costs for new houses and new developments  -  all to help preserve the great Australian dream for Australian working families to own their own home in the future.
     * The Government has also commissioned its first White Paper on homelessness and is looking at how to invest in new solutions in partnership with community and business groups to deal with this blight on us all.
     * The Government has identified over one hundred items of legislation in areas such as tax, superannuation and social security, that need amending to remove discrimination against same sex couples, and has decided to act through Parliament to remove this discrimination once and for all.
     * The Government has concluded an historic agreement with the state and territory governments of Australia to establish a single national authority to manage Australia's major inland river system  -  the Murray-Darling  -  whose future is threatened by the impact of over use and climate change.
     * Internationally, the Government has been active in establishing the three pillars of our relationship with the world: a strong alliance with the US, engagement with the United Nations (including our candidacy for the UN Security Council after a 25 year absence) and a strong commitment to our own immediate region, including a determination to tackle under-development across the Pacific Island states through our new proposal for Pacific Partnerships for Development.
     * And most recently, the Government has advanced the cause of gender equality by appointing the first woman Governor General in 107 years  -  it's been a long time coming.
As you can see, we've been busy.
But this is only a start. 
There is much, much more to be done in the period ahead  -  beginning with the Budget.
Our approach to the Budget
The Government's approach to the Budget is based on four fundamental principles.
     * We are committed to building a strong economy through responsible economic management  -  and an economy that also delivers for working families.
     * Second, we will honour our commitments to help working families under financial pressure.
     * Third, we will deliver on our commitments to prepare Australia for the great challenges of the future  -  acting on areas of long-term neglect of the previous government in education, health and in infrastructure, climate change and water.
     * And fourth, we will also be planning and providing for our nation's long-term national security needs in supporting this most fundamental function of the state.
In building a strong economy that delivers for working families:
We must wage a war on inflation  -  because inflation causes higher interest rates, and because inflation hurts working families.
We inherited the highest inflation rates in 16 years, and ten interest rate rises in a row, from a government that said they'd keep interest rates at record lows.
High government spending pushes up inflation and puts upward pressure on interest rates.
That's why in the budget we are reducing government spending  -  to place downward pressure on inflation and interest rates.
We are committed to delivering a new era of responsible economic management that reprioritises government spending to where it's needed most.
We are also committed to keeping a weather eye on unfolding global economic circumstances and maintaining a strong budget surplus that provides flexibility to deal with any unforeseen challenges that may arise.
Second, we intend to deliver on our commitment to help Australian families under financial pressure.
We understand that families are under financial pressure because of rising costs of living such as mortgages, rents, groceries, petrol and childcare  -  unlike our predecessors who told us working families have never been better off and still tell us today that the impact of rising prices and inflation are a fairy tale.
Some economic commentators say we shouldn't be delivering tax cuts to working families.
But we promised to implement tax cuts.
And we promised to increase childcare assistance in the Budget.
And we intend to deliver on these promises.
We can't ease all the financial pain working families are under but we are doing what we can to help  -  fighting against the emergence of two Australias.
Third, we intend to deliver on our commitment to the Australian people to prepare the nation for the long-term challenges of the future  -  to secure a long-term future for working families.
New leadership for Australia's future in areas of national priority such as schools, universities, TAFE colleges, hospital and economic infrastructure  -  areas which have been neglected by our predecessors.
New leadership to prepare Australia for major new challenges including the rise of India and China, climate change and water and our ageing population, where our predecessors once again neglected to plan.
Finally, there is the security of the nation itself.
There have been billions of dollars in defence waste  -  in one major project after another. This has got to stop.
That's why we are delivering a major defence White Paper later in the year, to properly prepare for Australia's 21st century needs in a significantly changing threat environment.
To do this, we will need to provide sufficient long-term funding to meet our future defence needs.
Prior to the election we committed to 3 per cent real increases in defence expenditure out to 2016, and in the Budget we'll be honouring that commitment over the forward estimates and beyond.
The Budget will contain difficult challenges. I don't hide from that. Some decisions will be unpopular. But our responsibility is to get the priorities right for the long term, and we intend to do that.
Budget commitments for older carers
A couple of weeks ago, we held a Community Cabinet at Jamieson High School at Mulgoa, in western Sydney.
We had many remarks and questions from families under financial pressure.
One of those contributions was from a woman responsible for the care of her adult son who has a profound disability.
She spoke about the fear that so many older carers have across our country  -  a concern for what happens to their disabled children once they are no longer able to provide the support that they have offered during their lifetime.
We do not pretend to have a total solution to this problem.
But it is time that we began to turn the corner.
The Government is making a commitment of $1 billion to fund disability services to address unmet needs and increase support for carers.
In this Budget we are investing $900 million in the new Commonwealth, State and Territory Disability Agreement (CSTDA) for the planning and management of disability services including respite, supported accommodation, community support and community access.
The previous Government was planning to deliver this $900 million in funding independently of the States and Territories, duplicating administrative costs and missing the opportunity to attract matching funding.
By allocating this money through the CSTDA, we can begin leveraging double the funding for disability services through negotiation with the States.
Today I announce that in addition to this $900 million investment, we will commit a further $100 million in the Budget in immediate new capital funding for supported accommodation for people with a disability.
These funds will complement recent State and Territory initiatives, such as the NSW Government's Stronger Together Plan.
This package is particularly focused on providing a response to the concerns that older carers often have about the future accommodation and support the needs of their children.
The Australian Institute of Health and Welfare has estimated that the total unmet demand for accommodation support and respite services by people with disabilities is around 23,800.
So this is a small first step - there is a long way to go. It only provides help for hundreds rather than thousands.
But this $100 million together with our announced $900 million investment is designed to provide additional funds to state and territory governments to begin to reduce this unmet demand.
This new capital funding will be provided immediately to State and Territory Governments, with no matching requirements, to enable them to increase the supply of supported accommodation as a matter of priority.
Importantly, this initiative will begin to help older carers of children with a disability to plan for the transition of their children to appropriate supported accommodation in the future.
It will help provide some peace of mind to older carers.
It is time to start turning the corner and start providing a fairer go for these most vulnerable Australians.
Our challenges beyond the Budget
The Budget represents but one part of our long-term plan for dealing with the nation's future challenges.
Our frame of reference for the future cannot simply be the next 12 months.
In fact, if we are serious about the future, consistent with the spirit of the recently concluded 2020 Summit, we need to be serious about the next 12 years.
The nation now expects us all to lift our sights beyond the electoral cycle for the simple reason that so many of the challenges that now confront us transcend the electoral cycle.
For example:
     * For the rest of this term we will need to confront the long term, interrelated challenges of our tax, welfare and retirement income systems  -  to make sure that we have the right balance between global competitiveness, individual incentive, a social safety net and a capacity for people to live with dignity in their retirement years;
     * A second challenge for the remainder of this term is to deal with the recommendations of Infrastructure Australia and move ahead the national audit of our infrastructure needs and a plan to act on that audit;
     * A third priority for the remainder of this term must be reform of the Federation. The 2020 Summit identified this as being a major structural drag on our national economic performance overall, as well as a source of fundamental frustration on the part of the nation's longsuffering consumers of government services.
     * A further challenge for our remaining term will be to get our domestic and international responses to climate change right, so that we are part of the global solution rather than just part of the global problem. At the same time ensuring that we are not placed at any competitive disadvantage in the context of new global arrangements.
     * We must also begin reforming the way in which we govern.
     * Should Labor be re-elected at the next election, the agenda of work that we will confront would continue to be substantial, not least within our own immediate region where we must see a long-term turnaround in the development trajectory of the Pacific Island states of the south-west Pacific.
The development trends in these small states have been heading in the wrong direction for decades  -  to their long term detriment and to ours.
The reality is that it will take the better part of the decade to start turning these states around  -  and given our leadership role within our region, and our own national interests, we have no alternative but to implement this long-term course of action.
The role of the Party
If we are to achieve any of these objectives for the Party and for the nation, we must remain in government.
It may come as a surprise to some people, but we did not win the last Federal election by a large margin.
Just as it may come as a surprise to some that we would lose the next election with just a small swing against us.
And the truth is, we now face a period of global economic uncertainty.
The challenges we face therefore are formidable.
You as the members of our party are its heart and soul.
You are also its hands and its feet.
If we are to prevail, it is paramount that we remain focused - absolutely focused - on the task at hand.
Remember as Chifley said to us sixty years ago: “the Labour movement can only be great by the united efforts of all those who believe in it”.
Chifley also once described our party as a “great family spreading its political philosophy across the whole continent”.
Like any family, from time to time there are disagreements.
And I'm reliably informed, there's been the odd disagreement or two here over the last few days.
The time has come to dust yourselves off.
The time has come to move forward once again.
The time has come to get on with the business of building a modern Australian nation capable of meeting the challenges of the 21st century.
In his last address to this conference on the 10th of June 1951 (just three days before his sudden death) Chifley issued this appeal to the members of the Party, an appeal that rings down the generations:
“The Labour movement was created by the pioneers... to make decisions for the best for all the people...... we are after all, the only political party in this country which stands for the masses [of people]...”  
“I hope the spirit which animated the people who began the Labour movement goes on today... I can only hope that the sincerity which you have shown over the years in victory and defeat won't be lost; that you will be inspired by the same things which inspired the pioneers of this movement....”
The challenge of Labor in government is to plan, to reform and to build  -  consistent with the values of those who pioneered our party; always applying those values to the new challenges of the future, challenges of which those pioneers could scarcely dream.
Carving out the nation's future.
And all along, seeking to advance and protect the lives and livelihoods of those families that need us.
On this our nation depends.
I thank the conference.


Can I thank the Western Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry for the invitation to speak to you today.
It is a pleasure to be here in Perth with so many leaders of WA business - you and your companies have made a major contribution to the success of your state and for the country itself. 
In fact, as you come back to Perth each time, there is a palpable sense of excitement, of enterprise and enthusiasm about this part of Australia. You feel it, you sense it.
Just walking bridge to bridge last night after I flew in from Canberra. Once again you run into people who are always up beat, talking about what  they are going to be doing next, it's a great sense of the ‘possible' that you have here in WA and I congratulate you for it.
It is very difficult to capture the spirit of a place but insofar as I experience WA, there is something of Queensland about this place.
And I mean that in every positive, Bronco related, Brisbane Lions related way, which is that, we wont talk a lot about that, and that is that you have about you a culture of enterprise and the possible, which you should cherish and nurture.
It is a good thing, and to be encouraged further by whoever occupies the Treasury benches in Government, be it in Canberra, or here in Perth.
A lot has been said and written about the remarkable economic conditions here in the West.
Western Australia has undoubtedly benefited from the extraordinary mining boom of the last 5 years.
But to that I would add, the challenge lies in how do we ensure that this extraordinary boom, and the dividend from it is invested into the state's and nation's long term global competitiveness. And that is very much the mission statement of the Government which I lead.
When I come here I find dynamic entrepreneurs leading innovative businesses  -  like the CO2 capture technology firm CoolEnergy; a home grown West Australian company that is delivering cutting-edge clean technology solutions to the global energy sector.
In this state I find innovation, creativity and enterprise.
I find workers whose creativity and enterprise have made so much of what happens here, an emblematic example of success in the age of globalisation.
On my first visit here three months ago, after becoming Prime Minister, I made my first major speech as Prime Minister about the future of the Australian economy.
I spoke of our commitment to tackle Australia's inflation challenge through responsible economic management  -  because inflation is the enemy of the economy and the enemy of working families.
I also spoke of the Government's commitment to build Australia's long term productive capacity through new investments in human capital, in physical capital and a new era of microeconomic reform.
We can't rest on our laurels, we have got to push ahead. We have got to move forward.
Today I'd like to report on some of our preparations for the Government's first Budget  -  a Budget that will deliver on our commitments and begin to lay the foundations for Australia's long term economic future.
Economic context
I should begin by saying that when we assumed office, we knew that this year's Budget would not be easy.
When we won Government on November 24 last year, we knew there was a lot of hard work to do.
We knew we were inheriting an economy which had sustained high inflation  -  the highest this country has seen in 16 years. 
We knew these mounting inflation pressures had contributed to 10 interest rate rises in a row.
And we knew that we had to put an end to an era of fiscal irresponsibility with public expenditure growing at 6.85 per cent in the four years to 2007/08  -  the highest growth rate in more than a decade.
Back in November, we knew that these conditions would present difficulties for the Government's fiscal strategy.
But since then, a series of international and domestic events have made economic management tasks, somewhat more challenging.
The global financial crisis has deepened more swiftly than expected.
The world economy has slowed so rapidly that the IMF was forced to revise down its global growth forecasts - not once but twice - in the early months of this year.
The Australian stock market has lost more than 25 per cent of its value  -  with the ASX All Ordinaries Index falling from its high of 6,873 points in November to a low of 5,130 points in March. And, even though some value has been recovered, this has heavily impacted already, for example capital gains tax revenue.
Crude oil prices have surged  -  up more than 34 per cent from $86 a barrel in November to a peak of $119 a barrel in April. These are big changes and they do represent significant changes in the operating environment in which government's now find themselves.
The annual rate of headline inflation has reached 4.2 per cent in the March quarter of 2008. Excluding the impact of the GST, this is the highest recorded inflation rate since inflation targeting was formally introduced in Australia in 1996.
These events  -  unforseen by most commentators six months ago  -  have reshaped the global economic landscape.  And reshaped so much of the national economic landscape which we must now navigate as the elected governments of Australia.
These events leave no doubt that what Australia needs now is a responsible Budget  -  based on the fundamental conservative principles of economic management.
Budget principles
In the context of these domestic and international economic challenges, the Budget process has been long, tough and demanding and you would expect that.
We have had to make some difficult decisions on the way through and they won't all be popular.
But within the confines of our fiscal position and the broader domestic and international economic constraints, we have stuck to our principles.
For too long budgets have been an annual political set-piece in which the government of the day delivers a swathe of handouts and quick fixes.
That is no longer good enough, given the challenges we face long term.
If Australia is to compete and succeed in a rapidly changing world we need a long-term approach to fiscal policy.
We need leadership that looks beyond the three-year electoral cycle.
That is why I am determined that this budget won't be another “one year wonder”.
It will be a Budget that sets a platform for long term growth.
It will begin to prepare Australia for the future  -  for the next 5, 10 and 20 years.
And in this year's Budget, we will build on this platform.
We'll do the same in next year's budget and the one following.
Three isolated budget packages over the electoral cycle actually don't add up to much.
What we want to be able to do is look back over this three year term and know that we delivered the first tranche of a coherent long-term fiscal and economic strategy for the nation, to prepare the nation for the economic challenges of the 21st Century.
And if we are elected again, I can tell you that we will continue to deliver budgets which build on the strong foundation that we will lay down this year.
That foundation is based on four baisc principles.
Our first priority is to build a strong economy through responsible economic management  -  a strong economy that also delivers for working families.
Second, we are committed to honouring our commitments to help working families under financial pressure.
Third, we will deliver on our commitments to prepare Australia for the great challenges of the future  -  acting on areas of long-term government neglect: in education, health, infrastructure, climate change and water.
Fourth, we will plan and provide for our nation's long-term defence and security needs in a rapidly changing threat environment.
These are the principles and priorities which have guided us in this Budget process, and they will be reflected in the outcomes on Budget night.
1. Building a strong economy that delivers for working families
Just yesterday, the Reserve Bank noted that there is “considerable uncertainty” about Australia's economic outlook.
In these uncertain economic times our objective is to put the Australian economy on its surest possible economic footing for the long term.
The first priority of building a strong economy is to tackle Australia's inflation problem.
Inflation is not just an abstract figure.
It's just not a number on a page.
It is not just a bureaucratic statistic.
It is a cancer which eats away at the living standards of all Australians.
Inflation hurts the working families struggling to put food on the table for the family.
A litre of milk now costs 11.6 per cent more than it did a year ago.
A loaf of bread is now 9 per cent more expensive than it was last year.
Vegetables cost nearly 10 per cent more than they did last year.
Health costs have risen 4.6 per cent over the past year.
Recently I received a letter from a young mother from Burpengary, a suburb of about 15,000 people 40 kilometres north of Brisbane.
She wrote that she had a job as a sales assistant in a butcher's shop in Brisbane earning $17 an hour.
She had to give up the job because the cost of child care for her three kids and the petrol for her drive to work was so high that she was only $50 a week better off after a whole day's work in the shop.
She wrote: “how is anybody supposed to get ahead when the cost of living is so high. If you buy three litres of milk and a loaf of bread  -  you have just spent $8.00.”
I get letters every week from every corner of the country telling me about the financial pressures faced by many working families.
I have said before there is no silver bullet to provide instant financial relief to those families currently facing these sort of financial pressures.
But where we can act, it is the Government's responsibility to do so.
That is why I believe we must do everything within our power to fight inflation because inflation is pushing up mortgage rates and pushing up the cost of living.
It is why I believe that inflation must be a key priority of this budget.
Unfortunately not everyone is of this opinion.
Mr Turnbull, for example has suggested that inflation is a “fairy-tale”.
He said last month that inflation is “under control”.
He said that it was at “manageable levels”.
Dr Nelson said yesterday that the inflation challenge is a “charade”.
Well, I am here today to say that's not my view. It is not the Government's view.
Nor is it the view of the International Monetary Fund which reported its World Economic Outlook last month that Australia's “main short-term policy challenge is to keep inflation pressures in check.”
Nor is it the view of working families who face higher prices and higher interest rates.
There may only be three people in Australia who don't believe that inflation is hurting working families through rising prices and rising mortgages.
Dr Nelson
Mr Turnbull, and the Tooth Fairy.
And all three are out of touch on this question.
If we do nothing  -  if we sit on our hands like the alternative Government is suggesting  -  then the responsibility for reducing inflation will fall to the Reserve Bank's blunt monetary policy instrument; and that means further hikes in interest rates. 
That's not good for anybody.
We now face the scenario of the Liberal Party of today attacking the Federal Labor Government from the left on fiscal policy.
At a time of high inflation the Liberal Party is urging us not to cut government spending, and presumably therefore, to increase government spending.
I regard this as gross economic irresponsibility in our current circumstances.
And I believe it reflects short-term populism.
The Government is committed to reducing inflationary pressures on the economy through this Budget.
That's why we've got to cut government spending. 
The Budget will cut irresponsible spending because profligate spending has been one of the main reasons we are in this inflation predicament.
We need responsible fiscal policy to start heading in the right direction.
That's why a budget surplus based on cuts in government spending is necessary to reduce some of the pressure on working families from high interest rates.
In opposition, I committed to conservative economic management through achieving budget surpluses, on average, over the economic cycle.
In government, we will honour that commitment.
We will do so in large part by reducing government spending.
The surplus I set as a target for the Government in Perth, when I was here last, in January of 1.5 per cent of GDP was considerably higher than our predecessors were planning for the upcoming financial year.
We will have to make significant cuts to a number of existing government programs, to achieve that higher surplus and to reprioritise spending to reflect the nation's greatest needs.
I can announce today that this Budget will achieve a one-off 2 per cent efficiency dividend across government.  
This efficiency dividend of itself, will yield a further $1.3 billion over the next four years - over and above what the previous government had planned.
Does Mr Turnbull, for example, believe  -  having said that there is no economic case for budget cuts, that the Government should not impose this $1.3 billion saving?
What does the Liberal Party of today stand for if they have abandoned a commitment to fiscal conservatism?
What does the Liberal Party of today stand for stand for if they no longer believe we should cut government spending?
Or that we should eliminate government waste?
I notice also that the Liberals today have been returning to the question of inflation and the inflation challenge and it's interrelationship with industrial relations.
They released a piece of Treasury advice from the early part of last year on the impact of industrial relations on inflation.
This Treasury advice dealt with the impact of industrial relations settings on the overall inflation rate, together with a range of other factors.
Of course the Treasury advice in question was released before Labor released it's industrial relations policy, before it released it's industrial relations policy implementation plan and before I should add, the Liberals themselves introduced their own Fairness Test as part of the subsequent revision to industrial relations laws.
That Fairness Test, as businesses in this room will perhaps attest themselves, adding considerably to the administrative impost on the business.
I would say overall that when it comes to placing these things into proper context, it is important to put them into their chronological context. It is important also to clearly deduce from this engagement by the Liberal Party in this debate, in this fashion, that they are seeking to argue that the only effective tool for dealing with the inflation challenge, is industrial relations and Workchoices.
Our view is that when it comes to dealing with the challenge of inflation, what we need is a five part strategy, the core of which lies in producing a significant budget surplus, around the target that we announced when we were last here in Perth, and achieving that target through effective savings through an attack on unnecessary Government spending.
2. Delivering on our commitment to help working families under financial pressure
The second commitment of this Budget is to help working families under financial pressure.
Our opponents have told us that working families have “never been better off”.
They say the effect of inflation on family budgets is exaggerated.
We had a Community Cabinet out in Western Sydney only a few weeks ago and we listened very carefully to what people were saying to us out there.
Working families face a daily battle to cope with financial pressure because of the rising costs of living  -  every day costs such as mortgages, rents, groceries, petrol and childcare.
It is our job as a responsible national government to help where we can.
That is why we are delivering $31 billion of tax relief over the next four years, directed at low to middle income families.
Some economic commentators say we shouldn't be delivering tax cuts to these families. But we promised to do so, and we promised also to increase childcare assistance in the Budget, and we intend to deliver on that.
We will be increasing the childcare tax rebate from 30 to 50 per cent and paying it quarterly - at a cost of $1.6 billion.
These measures won't take away all the financial pressures facing working families.
But they are practical and responsible policies that provide assistance where it is most needed.
Let me tell you what this means in practical terms.
For an Australian family with one parent working full time and one parent working part time (that's three days a week) and a combined gross income of $75,000, this budget will deliver tax cuts worth $27.88 per week or $1,450 each year.
And if that family has one child in long day care for 30 hours a week, the Government's additional Child Care Tax Rebate will deliver an additional benefit of $19.05 per week or $990 per year from 1 July 2008. 
In addition to these measures, the Government will also tackle the housing affordability crisis with a $1.4 billion package of practical policies.
In the 2008 Budget we will include a $500 million Housing Affordability Fund to drive housing construction activity.
It will also establish First Home Saver Accounts to help young people get onto the ladder of home ownership. Over the next four years, the Commonwealth will invest around $1 billion in these special accounts to help people save a deposit for a house.
In addition, the 2008 Budget will look after those people in our community who are doing it toughest.
In the upcoming budget the Government will commit $1 billion to fund disability services and increase support for carers.
This $1 billion commitment includes an extra $100 million in capital funding, to build more supported accommodation for people with a disability so that more older carers can have assurance that there are good facilities to look after their loved ones when they're no longer able to do so.
It is our job as a Labor Government and as a responsible national Government to make sure that those who need that practical level of assistance, get it.
3. Delivering on our long-term policy challenges
Our third objective in this Budget is to prepare the nation for the long-term challenges of the future  -  to secure a long-term future for the nation and for working families.
We are committed to providing long term economic leadership for Australia, in key areas like education, health and infrastructure.
We will face up to Australia's big future challenges like climate change, the ageing population and the rise of India and China.
These were areas of gross policy neglect in the past. But they cannot be neglected any more.
We need to begin implementing long term solutions to address these long term challenges.
The longer we neglect our long term challenges, the harder it will be to deal with them.
This neglect was nowhere more evident than in infrastructure.
Consider the facts because they are particularly apposite for the infrastructure challenges here in the West:
     * CEDA reports that as a result of underinvestment, the backlog in infrastructure investment for water, energy and land transport alone is around $25 billion dollars - and that this is costing us around 0.8 per cent of GDP a year in lost production. That's $8 billion a year;
     * According to a CEDA report, if we were to address this backlog, it would increased exports by 1.8 per cent, increase business investment by 1.2 per cent, and lower the consumer price index by 3.2 per cent.
     * Further, it is estimated that a 1 per cent increase in investment in infrastructure results in a permanent increase in economic output of 0.17 and 0.39 per cent;
     * Australia ranks 20th out of 25 OECD countries for our investment in public infrastructure as a proportion of GDP;
     * The Bureau of Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Economics estimate that urban congestion  -  caused by inadequate infrastructure - will cost families and businesses nearly $20 billion by 2020;
     * Australia's broadband infrastructure is not up to scratch, with average download speeds lagging at 27th among all developed economies;
     * ALGA estimates that inferior broadband infrastructure could cost regions up to $2.6 billion dollars and 30,000 jobs;
The economic consequences of this underinvestment in physical capital are significant.
Consequences for economic growth.
Consequences for productivity growth.
Consequences for jobs.
And consequences for rising inflation and therefore higher interest rates.
The Government is committed to investing in Australia's future and addressing our nation's long-term infrastructure bottlenecks.
We know it is not possible to turn around overnight the long term infrastructure neglect that the nation finds itself with today.
But we are certainly going to try.
We are certainly going to make a start.
It's time to set our eyes on addressing the nation's long term needs in road, rail, ports and other infrastructure.
The funds that we allocate to the nation's infrastructure challenges in next week's Budget will be properly and responsibly allocated through the benefit of the Government's new statutory advisory council, entitled, Infrastructure Australia.
Infrastructure Australia will ensure that Australia's infrastructure needs are comprehensively audited and prioritised.
Australia will produce its first Infrastructure Priority List  -  which will guide of dollars in private and public sector investment in coming years.
This will help create the pipeline of projects needed to make investment in infrastructure easier.
This advice will be independent  -  at arms length of government  -  to make sure that the infrastructure investments are made according to the national interest, not political interests.
This infrastructure funding will be in addition to the Western Australian Infrastructure Fund the Federal Government committed to during the election.
Nowhere is the case for infrastructure investment more clear than here in Western Australia.
More than any other state, WA's economic activity in recent years  -  primarily through the mining boom  -  has been the foundation of the nation's economic strength.
The WA Infrastructure Fund will be set up to invest in State infrastructure projects over the next 20 years.
Less than 12 months ago, the nation's peak infrastructure organisation  -  Infrastructure Partnerships Australia  -  released its list of infrastructure priorities.
For Western Australia, The IPA's priorities are:
     * The Fiona Stanley hospital in Murdoch
     * A multi-user sporting arena for big football matches
     * Transport links between the Perth CBD and Northbridge
     * Dredging the inner harbour at Fremantle's port
     * Development of a new port facility at Oakajee in the Geraldton region
     * The Goldfields Water project
This is their list. What it indicates is the fact that many here, and many round the nation, are taking an active interest in underlying the importance of Government's coordinating effectively to ensure that in partnership with the private sector, the nation's and the state's long term infrastructure needs are met.
Infrastructure Australia will work in conjunction with the Private Sector and with State Government's to ensure that we get the priorities right and we get the priorities right for WA's long term infrastructure needs.
The WA Infrastructure Fund recognises the contribution Western Australia makes to the national economy. That fund, will ensure that WA gets the infrastructure it will need for the future, ensure that it is playing it's part to ensure that we have got the right infrastructure framework for this state for the future, to secure Australia's long term prosperity.
4. National Security
The fourth major objective this Budget is to strengthen Australia's national security.
Our Government is ever mindful of the national security challenges we face.
The threat from terrorism is real.
Australian citizens have been the victims of terrorist attacks.
Our embassies overseas have been targeted.
Terrorist groups continue to look for ways to attack.
Groups such as Al Qaeda continue to mutate, regroup and present new threats.
In Afghanistan, the Taliban is trying to re-establish its regime.
We have had a terrible reminder in recent days that the Taliban are only too prepared to kill to further their aim.
States like North Korea and Iran continue to pose a threat to stability in the region and around the world by seeking to develop nuclear weapons.
To meet these traditional security threats in a changing world, we need to work even more closely with our key security partners.
In a connected world, we also face a new range of threats to our national security.
Threats like pandemics that spread across national borders quickly; a threat that requires us to build a robust regional capacity to respond.
Threats like natural disasters that also need region-wide cooperation to respond to effectively.
To meet this array of threats we need a comprehensive national security strategy.
We need to back this up with clear statements of our defence strategy, our foreign policy and our approach to domestic security threats.
For too long Australia's approach to national security has been piecemeal.
Defence spending has been wasteful in the past  -  let's never forget this $1.1 billion Seasprite helicopter fiasco.
We will be improving defence acquisition systems to ensure that resources are used wisely. We will be committing the necessary funds to defence.
We will determine our defence priorities for the long term future through this year's Defence White Paper. This will provide us with the planning platform for the future.
Prior to the election we committed to three per cent real increases in defence expenditure out to 2016, and in the Budget we'll be honouring that commitment over the forward estimates and beyond.
Our aim with the budget is to build the long term national security defences of the nation for the future.
The Government's broader economic strategy
In each of these four big areas, this Budget is about the nation's long-term future.
The new Australian Government is committed to building a modern, competitive Australia capable of meeting the challenges of the 21st century  -  to secure the nation's future and the future for working families.
If we are to build a modern Australia for the 21st century, we will need to take a long-term approach to the physical and human capital needs that drive productivity growth.
This Budget will establish the platform for building long term productivity growth. We will invest in an education revolution.
We need to invest to make our future infrastructure needs in areas such as roads, rail, ports and broadband to make sure that we are dealing with those challenges long term.
We also need to invest in greater workforce participation by reforming our tax and welfare system.  Beyond the Budget, the Government is taking a long-term approach to policymaking.
Australia needs a long term, comprehensive economic strategy to enhance our global competitiveness by arresting the recent slide in our productivity performance.
To do this we must restart the economic reform process that has stalled in recent years.
That is why the Government will match our commitment to new investment in this Budget with a renewed commitment to microeconomic reform through the COAG process.
That's why the Government has advanced a large program of work beyond this Budget for the remainder of this term.
We need to move towards a seamless national economy by cutting the wasteful duplication and red tape facing business.  
We need to end the blame game and make the Federation work effectively, in critical areas like infrastructure, education, training and health.
We need to implement our agenda for reform of the Federation, including a plan for business deregulation.
In partnership with state governments we have identified already 27 areas for deregulation and red tape reduction to improve efficiency and reduce the regulatory burden on the economy.
We need to modernise our tax, welfare and superannuation systems to recognise rather than penalise hard work, and to enable Australian families to get by and to get ahead.
We need to act decisively and responsibly on climate change.
And should we be re-elected we face a long term agenda of work responding to the mega-challenges represented by the rise of China, the rise of India as well as promoting stability and development in the South West Pacific, where developments have not been headed in the right direction.  
To conclude: I am optimistic about Australia's economic future.
And I am optimistic about WA's future.
Spending a day in the stunning city of Perth reminds me everything that there is to be positive about this great country of ours, Australia.
Australia can and should strive to be the best place in the world to live, work, and raise a family.
If there was one, overwhelming message from the recently conducted 2020 Summit in Canberra it was this: you won't achieve long term success if we don't plan for the long term.
You can't change this country if you're only interested in the short term.
You can't repair the physical infrastructure of this nation if there is a one-year horizon.
You can't build Australia's human capital and skills needs if you're only planning out to the next election.
You can't transform the federal system if you're only interested in the next opinion poll.
That is why we have made a commitment to do things differently starting in this Budget.
We will build a strong economy through responsible economic management  -  a strong economy that delivers for working families.
We will honour our commitments to help working families under financial pressure.
We will begin to prepare Australia for the great challenges of the future.
We will plan and provide for our nation's long-term defence and security needs.
In this budget and beyond, the Government is committed to making the right decisions now to underpin our long term security and our prosperity.
I thank you for your attention.


Introduction
Thank you for the invitation to address the 2008 Future Summit. 
I am especially pleased to be with you tonight because the Future Summit combines two things that I am particularly passionate about:
     * A long term view of Australia's economic, social and security challenges.
     * And an open, inclusive and consultative approach to addressing those challenges.
I believe that long-term thinking about Australia's future shouldn't be something we do every three years at election time.
It should be an integral, normal and routine part of our democracy.
Australia won't tackle the challenges that face us, nor will we fully seize the great opportunities that lie ahead, if we allow ourselves to drift without an overarching vision for the nation  -  and a strategy for realising that vision.
I believe Australians want to part of creating that vision and that strategy. They don't want to sit back and wait for government to come up with all the answers. They want to be involved in shaping their nation's future and their own future.
The long term vision for the nation needs to be a shared vision; one that evolves through time; and is continually debated in every corner of the country at schools and dinner tables and backyard BBQs.
The Government held an ideas Summit of its own in Canberra last month  -  and I'd like to thank Michael [Roux] for his advice in shaping the format of the Australia 2020 Summit.
The Summit was an experiment for the new Australian Government. When we launched the idea of a Summit earlier in the year we didn't know how Australia would respond to this kind of open-democracy. We were just hopeful that we'd get a good turnout and pick up a few good ideas.
But we had no idea that we would be overwhelmed by an avalanche of enthusiasm from every part of the country.
More than 8,000 people applied to attend the Summit.
Participants travelled  -  at their own expense  -  from faraway corners of the nation and (in some cases) other parts of the world to be part of the debate.
The Australia 2020 website received more than 3,000 submissions.
And more than 500 schools held summits of their own.
The Summit generated a large number of ideas. But for me, one of the most important things to come out of the Summit was the idea that there aren't enough opportunities like this for open public debate in Australia.
There aren't enough forums in which Australians from government, business and the community can come together to discuss the nation's long term challenges.
And that is why I am pleased to be part of this Future Summit tonight.
Achieving Long Term Change
In my view, governments should be judged not just by their longevity, but more by their record of positive and permanent change to the direction of the nation.
That is why I am proud to look back on many of the lasting achievements of the last Labor Government.
Through their wide ranging economic reforms, the Hawke and Keating Governments of the 1980s and 1990s transformed the Australian economy.
They had big ideas and a big vision.
They floated the currency.
They cut tariffs.
They modernised labour markets, by introducing enterprise bargaining.
They introduced competition policy.
They cracked open the hidden protection which had shielded the airlines, the banks, and many other industries.
These reforms helped open the Australian economy to the world.
For that reason, the Hawke and Keating Labor Governments are rightly credited with laying the foundation for much of the prosperity that Australia has enjoyed for the last decade.
The result was higher productivity. Between 1993 and 1998 productivity growth was 3.3 per cent. Between 1999 and 2004 productivity growth fell to 2.0 per cent. And between 2004 and the present productivity growth fell to 1.1 per cent.
By comparison, the period since 1996 has been relatively uneventful in terms of economic reforms.
And more importantly, many gathering economic challenges went unaddressed.
The remarkable period of prosperity in the last decade  -  principally delivered by the extraordinary mining boom  -  concealed a multitude of latent economic weaknesses.
Prosperity delivered by the mining boom concealed the fact that our productivity growth is on a steady decline.
It concealed the fact that our infrastructure is inadequate.
It concealed the fact that our skills shortages have become chronic.
It concealed the fact that Australia's microeconomic reform agenda has stalled.
The longer we fail to face up to Australia's economic challenges, the harder it will be to deal with them.
If we do not start acting now, Australia will wake up one morning with the mother of all economic hangovers.
Australian businesses have long been aware of Australia's economic challenges. They have repeatedly called for these weaknesses to be addressed.
The Chairman of the Australian Institute of Company Directors, John Story, said recently:
“We should have been addressing infrastructure issues and skills shortages five years ago. I mean, we talked about it. These issues were discussed around board tables like this for the past 10 years, and the chickens are coming home to roost and there is no short-term fix.”
I could not agree more.
The Government's Long Term Economic Agenda
The new Australian Government is committed to renewing the Australian economic reform project.
The last Labor Government had a vision to internationalise the Australian economy.
It delivered on that vision and opened Australia up to the global economy.
Our Government has a new vision for the nation's economic future.
Our vision is to transform Australia's competitiveness in the global economy.
Boosting Australia's global economic competitiveness is the touchstone of that vision.
And to boost our global economic competitiveness we must boost productivity growth.
That is the Australian Government's central narrative on the economy.
The Government is committed to building a modern, competitive Australia capable of meeting the challenges of the 21st century  -  to secure the nation's future and the future for working families.
You don't achieve global competitiveness with rhetoric.
You don't achieve it with a few controversial reforms.
You achieve it with a comprehensive policy reform agenda which cuts across the entire economy.
The comprehensive long term economic agenda of the new Australian Government has several parts.
We are committed to disciplined macroeconomic management to ensure that the economy has a stable foundation.
We are committed to an active microeconomic reform agenda to boost Australia's lagging productivity performance by making long overdue investments in human and physical capital.
We are committed to creating incentives that encourage work and enterprise  -  and we are determined to reform the tax system, boost workforce participation and tackle welfare to work barriers.
Finally, we are committed to getting the policy architecture right; and reforming the Federation is key to the success of our broader agenda.
Budget Principles
The Government's first budget, to be delivered on Tuesday, is one step in our program to transform the future competitiveness of the Australian economy.
For too long budgets have been an annual political give-away in which the government of the day serves up an array of handouts and quick fixes.
That is no longer good enough.
If Australia is to compete and succeed in a rapidly changing world we need a long-term approach to fiscal policy.
That is why I have said that this Budget won't be another “one year wonder”.
It will be a budget that sets a platform for long term growth. It will begin to prepare Australia for the future.
It will build a strong foundation of economic stability that will benefit Australia for years to come.
That foundation is based on four principles.
Our first priority is to build a strong economy through responsible economic management  -  a strong economy that also delivers for working families.
Second, we are committed to honouring our commitments to help working families under financial pressure.
Third, we will deliver on our commitments to prepare Australia for the great challenges of the future  -  acting on areas of long-term government neglect: in education, health, infrastructure, climate change and water, and the rise of India and China.
Fourth, we will plan and provide for our nation's long-term defence and security needs in a rapidly changing environment.
These are the principles and priorities which have guided us in this Budget process, and they will be reflected in the outcomes on Budget night.
The Budget is a first step in the Government's broader long term economic strategy.
It is an opportunity for us to make a start on our long term vision for the nation.
Disciplined Macroeconomic Strategy
The Budget will reflect the commitment to fiscal conservatism that I made during last year's election campaign.
I committed to bringing back the fundamental principles of disciplined macroeconomic management.
In the last four years Australia has lost sight of some of these principles.
When we took office in November last year government spending was growing at 6.85 per cent in the four years to 2007/08  -  the highest growth rate in more than a decade.
Since then, global economic events -  unforseen by most commentators six months ago  -  have reshaped the global economic landscape.
These events only underline the importance of a return to fiscal responsibility.
The IMF's recent World Economic Outlook report specifically singled out the need for responsible budget policy to help the Australian economy deal with the global financial crisis.
The report stated that prudent fiscal policies and flexible exchange rates provide Australia with “important buffers against any substantial weakening in the external environment”.
That's a call we hear loud and clear.
And that is why we have found responsible savings in this Budget.
The second principle of disciplined macroeconomic management is low inflation.
Our Government is committed to doing everything in our power to put downward pressure on inflation because inflation is the enemy of the economy and the enemy of working families.
Inflation eats away at the living standards of all Australians.
Inflation hurts the working families struggling to make ends meet.
It took the best part of a decade or more of hard economic reforms to tame inflation and boost productivity.
The Government can't fix these sorts of financial pressures overnight, but there are practical things we can do.
And that starts with fighting inflation because inflation is pushing up mortgage rates and pushing up the cost of living.
That's why in January I set out a five point plan to wage a war against inflation.
Our plan addressed both demand side and supply side pressures on inflation.
We committed to use all the tools available to us to fight inflation.
First, we said we would ensure the Government takes the pressure off demand by running a strong surplus in this year's budget. This will help make the task of the Reserve Bank easier.
Second, we have committed to examine all options to provide real incentive to encourage private savings.
Third, we will be unfolding our plan for tackling chronic skills shortages in the economy.
Fourth, we will provide national leadership to tackle infrastructure bottlenecks.
And fifth, we will provide practical ways of helping people re-enter the workforce and remove disincentives to working hard, to lift workforce participation.
The Budget will be a core part of this plan.
By exercising restraint, our plan is to do everything we can to ease the pressure on inflation and interest rates.
And for the longer term, the budget will also begin to outline our approach to the chronic investment deficits in the capacity side of the economy.
Not everyone agrees with our focus on responsible fiscal policy and our fight against inflation.
An Active Microeconomic Reform Agenda
The second pillar of our long term economic strategy is a comprehensive microeconomic agenda.
Whereas we are committed to economic discipline in our macroeconomic policies, we are committed to necessary policy activism in microeconomic reform.
Medium term macroeconomic policies are essential for stability.
Budget surpluses are essential for economic stability.
But real fundamental change to the underlying structure of the economy requires deep and pervasive microeconomic reform.
Productivity growth is not something you achieve with a single broad sweeping policy.
It is the aggregation of efficiency gains industry by industry, market by market, sector by sector.
Australia needs to revive its microeconomic reform agenda if we are to arrest the recent slide in our productivity performance.
Benchmarked against the United States, the global productivity leader, Australian productivity increased from 77 per cent in 1990 to 85 per cent in 1999.
But by 2006 it had fallen back to 79 per cent.
This means that in comparative terms, Australia has now almost completely lost the relative productivity gains of 1990s.
That is why our Government will couple our commitment to new investment in this Budget with a renewed commitment to microeconomic reform after a decade of neglect.
Our microeconomic reform agenda involves several elements.
First, if Australia is to maximise its future competitiveness in the global economy, we need the best possible regulatory environment.
We need to “get the rules right” so that Australian businesses have wasteful regulation taken off their backs and face appropriate rewards for hard work and enterprise.
This means we need to restart the competition policy agenda.
We need to press ahead with deregulation.
And we need to create an environment that supports risk taking and innovation.
In this arena, our goal must be to move towards seamless and competitive national product and labour markets.
Today we are a long way from that goal.
That is why the Government has an agenda for reform of the Federation, including a plan for business deregulation.
In partnership with state governments we have identified 27 areas for deregulation and red tape reduction to improve efficiency and reduce the regulatory burden on the economy.
We also need to modernise our tax, welfare and retirement income systems to recognise rather than penalise hard work, and to enable Australian families to get by and get ahead.
That is why today the Government has announced a comprehensive review of Australia's tax system.
The review panel will be chaired by the Secretary of the Treasury, Dr Ken Henry and will also comprise Mr Greg Smith; Dr Jeff Harmer, Heather Ridout, and John Piggott.
The review will examine and make recommendations to create a tax structure that will position Australia to deal with the demographic, social, economic and environmental challenges of the 21st century.
The review will consider whether Australia's tax system contains appropriate incentives for:
     * workforce participation and skill formation;
     * individuals to save and provide for their future, including access to affordable housing;
     * investment and the promotion of efficient resource allocation to enhance productivity and international competitiveness; and
     * reducing tax system complexity and compliance costs.
This review will release an initial discussion paper by Treasury by the end of July 2008. The review panel will provide a final report to the Treasurer by the end of 2009.
The second element of our microeconomic agenda is core investment in basic human and physical capital.
Australian business cannot be competitive if it is hamstrung by poor infrastructure or if it cannot access the skills it requires in its workforce.
For too long the basic human and physical capital needs of the nation have been ignored.
Consider the state of Australia's infrastructure.
Australia ranks 20th out of 25 OECD countries for our investment in public infrastructure as a proportion of GDP.
The Bureau of Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Economics estimate that urban congestion  -  caused by inadequate infrastructure - will cost families and businesses nearly $20 billion by 2020.
Australia's broadband infrastructure is not up to scratch, with average download speeds lagging at 27th among all developed economies.
The economic consequences of this underinvestment in physical capital are significant.
CEDA reports that as a result of underinvestment, the backlog in infrastructure investment for water, energy and land transport alone is around $25 billion - and that this is costing us around 0.8 per cent of GDP a year in lost production. That's $8 billion a year.
The Government is committed to investing in Australia's future and addressing our nation's long-term infrastructure bottlenecks.
We know it is not possible to turn around overnight the long term infrastructure neglect that the nation finds itself with today.
But we are certainly going to make a start.
Infrastructure Australia will work towards ensuring that Australia's infrastructure needs are comprehensively audited and prioritised.
Infrastructure isn't the only area where underinvestment is hurting business.
For a long time Australia has faced chronic shortages of skilled labour.
A business survey released by Grant Thornton earlier this year showed that 58 per cent of businesses identified skills shortages as the biggest constraint to their growth.
That is why we must begin to make the appropriate investments in skills and education for the long term human capital needs of the economy.
That is why we have unveiled substantial initiatives including:
     * the provision of up to 15 hours per week for 40 weeks per year of early childhood education for all 4 year olds provided by a qualified early childhood teacher.
     * $2.5 billion over 10 years to enable all secondary schools to apply for funding of between $500,000 and $1.5 million for Trade Training Centres.
     * providing high speed broadband to schools, computers at school for all students from years 9 to 12
     * a strategic focus on vocational training through the Skills Australia expert group and an investment in an additional 450,000 training places over the next four years.
     * HECS incentives for students who study maths and science as well as those teaching those subjects, and a comprehensive examination of the future of higher education.
     * 1,000 new mid-career research fellowships to help retain and attract the most talented researchers.
     * a new national curriculum in Maths, the Sciences , English and History.
     * a National Asian Languages and Studies in Schools Program to provide additional Asian language classes in high schools.
Australia must make these investments to lift our competitiveness.
The new Australian Government is committed to beginning the process of investing in the nation's human and physical capital.
But we also have a longer term agenda.
We don't want to stop at improving Australia's stock of capital.
We want to take these basic investments to the next level.
This is a long term agenda to go from better skills to a truly innovative workforce.
To go from improved education to a national culture of creativity, innovation and enterprise.
To go from stronger training and skills accreditation to genuine domestic labour mobility.
To go from better infrastructure to dynamic and sophisticated markets for water and transport including pricing and governance reform.
To take our microeconomic reforms and build them into a truly seamless economy by harmonising regulation across the country.
If we are to achieve this we need to fix the governance of Australia's economy and to put in place evidence-based policymaking.
Fixing the Governance Architecture
That is why we are acting to reform the relationships between all levels of Australian government  -  federal, state and local.
We have breathed life into the once fractious COAG process and governments are now working together to drive reform and achieve real outcomes for Australia.
A key part of the COAG agenda, and the Government's approach more broadly, is to strengthen the link between evidence and policy.
This requires us to be more transparent in articulating our goals, monitoring whether we're achieving them and reporting on progress.
For many of our great policy challenges, there is not one ‘right answer', and even where there seems to be, policy challenges are rarely stagnant.
To move forward, we need to be extending those ideas that work and disbanding those that don't.
This requires a new culture among policy makers too  -  supporting experimentation, innovation and learning.
Conclusion
Australia faces many challenges beyond the economic challenges I have discussed tonight. Challenges of climate change, challenges associated with water and energy, and challenges associated with the rise of India and China and the broader shift in geopolitical power.
In all these areas, Australia is looking for a long term strategy.
I say this because I hear it from people right around the country.
From business.
From governments at all levels.
From communities.
And from working families.
And I say it because I believe that we won't achieve long term success unless we have a long term vision and a plan.
I want to look back on our period in Government knowing that we didn't shirk the challenging questions.
That we didn't play it safe with the politics of short-term advantage.
We didn't promote quick-fixes over long term investments.
I know that many will say that this is a political gamble for the Government.
Because the benefits of our broader agenda won't be fully realised for many years.
But we believe that our objective of boosting Australia's global competitiveness cannot be achieved unless we have a long term vision and a long term reform program.
You can't change the structure of an economy by giving it a quick coat of paint.
Productivity improvement is a painstaking process involving hundreds of careful, creative and tailored micro-economic reforms.
I want to look back on our time in government and know that we began that process and that we began to change the nation for the better.
Thank you for your attention.


Acknowledgements
The Minister for Veterans' Affairs, the Hon Alan Griffin MP
The Leader of the Opposition
General Sir Phillip Bennett and Lady Bennett
Major General Peter Phillips and Mrs Phillips
Lt General Peter Leahy, Chief of Army, and Mrs Leahy
Veterans of the battle of Coral and Balmoral
Families of those who gave their lives
Members of the diplomatic corps
Distinguished guests
Ladies and gentlemen
We gather here in the nation's parliament to mark the 40th anniversary of a great example of the courage, conviction and dedication of Australia's servicemen in Vietnam.
We gather to honour you, the veterans of the Battles of Coral and Balmoral.
These battles saw some of the heaviest fighting and some of the most prolonged engagements of Australian forces in that theatre.
Between 12 May and 6 June 1968, the Australian forces were engaged almost daily with North Vietnamese Army regular forces.
The fighting was fierce because the North Vietnamese forces needed to clear the path to Saigon.
They had to eliminate Coral and Balmoral and the Australian Task Force so that they could secure their routes to and from Saigon following on from the Tet Offensive.
So the North Vietnamese forces launched attack after attack on Coral and Balmoral.
The first attacks began in the early hours the day after our forces arrived.
And that first encounter was a sign of things to come  -  fierce fighting, bloody fighting and at close quarters.
It could have been a disaster on that first night.
One soldier wrote of that first night at Coral: “Ammo was low, no grenades, the VC were all around us. Out of the 7 men around the M60, I had lost one dead and one wounded  -  there was nothing I could do.”
But, thanks to you, thanks to your determination, your professionalism and your courage, that first night was not a disaster.
In fact, far from it.
The enemy got a little more than they were bargaining for on that first night.
One officer said of his men: they “fought like thrashing machines”.
But of course our troops  -  you, our guests of honour tonight  -  did not just defend, you took the fight up to the enemy.
You spent days patrolling, searching for the enemy and on many occasions came into contact with a determined foe.
I understand that initially the infantry  -  like the infantry in every war, were a bit suspicious of working with tanks.
But after the first day's operation alongside elements of the 1st Armoured Regiment against enemy bunkers, perhaps more than a few minds had been changed.
And, just like 50 years earlier in the First World War when General Monash showed at the Battle of Le Hamel that tanks and infantry could work together, you showed that armour and infantry could form an effective fighting team.
The team at Coral and Balmoral went beyond the infantry and the tanks.
It included the APCs; it included the artillery; it included air crews and, of course, the medics.
What is remarkable about the battle is that despite all the chaos of the battlefield, and the chaos of trying to establish new positions, and coordinate all the elements of a complex and changing battle plan, everyone played their part  -  and everyone played their part with distinction.
In spite of the individual danger you all faced, in spite of the risks you all faced, you got on with it. You did your jobs.
When that happens, the people around you know that they can have confidence in you.
It lets them get on with their job too.
It is an important part of the great Australian tradition of looking after your mates.
It's part of the tradition of not letting your mates down.
It's part of the Australian tradition of the profession of arms
And that is the tradition that you lived up to 40 years ago.
It is that tradition that you added to by your actions 40 years ago.
Tonight, as Prime Minister of Australia, I want to pay tribute to your service to Australia in this great battle of the Vietnam War.
For your service, I say thank you.
For family members here tonight of those who lost their lives, I offer my sympathies.
For those whose service to the nation through this terrible war has not been properly honoured by government, I express regret.
We can never repay the price you have paid.
But tonight I say that we will properly honour the memory of those who fell in the actions around Coral and Balmoral.
Veterans of Australia  -  tonight it is my great pleasure to host this reception in your honour.
The political debate around the Vietnam War was great.
But there can be no debate about the valour of those who fought in that war  -  wearing proudly the uniform of Australia.
On this the 40th anniversary of the Battles of Coral and Balmoral, the nation salutes you.


Your Excellencies the Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia, Major General Michael Jeffery and Mrs Marlena Jeffery
The Minister for Veterans' Affairs, the Hon Alan Griffin MP
The Hon Bronwyn Bishop MP, representing the Leader of the Opposition
The High Commissioner of New Zealand, our co-combatants in this action
Members of the Diplomatic Corps
Veterans of the Battle of Coral and Balmoral
Families of those who gave their lives
Distinguished guests
Ladies and gentlemen
Welcome to this beautiful Canberra morning.
On this, our avenue of heroes.
In this country the Vietnam War is sometimes remembered not for what happened in Vietnam, but for what happened in Australia.
Today, I want to say that the Australian Government remembers what happened in Vietnam with our men and women in uniform.
The Government remembers the sacrifice of those who fought.
The Government remembers the ultimate sacrifice of those who fell.
And we remember with pride the qualities displayed by our men and women who served in Vietnam.
Australia's defence forces served with great distinction through the Vietnam War.
As did their father's before them, and as did their father's before them, in previous conflicts, all wearing, proudly, the uniform of Australia.
You  -  the veterans here today  -  upheld all the great traditions that are ANZAC.
60,000 Australians served in Vietnam.
520 gave their lives in Vietnam.
And many others still their lives scarred by that conflict.
The battles of Fire Support Bases Coral and Balmoral were the largest and longest series of actions of the war for Australian forces.
Today the nation pauses to mark the 40th anniversary of those battles.
Coral and Balmoral has become a part  -  an important part  -  of Australian military history.
It was a large action, it was a long action, it was a bloody action.
It was strategically significant.
And it was an action costly in the lives of the brave young Australians  -  Regulars and Nashos  -  who gave, literally, their all.
A couple of months ago I went to the Australian War Memorial to open the new gallery for conflicts from 1945 to the present.
One of the battles that is commemorated in that gallery is Coral and Balmoral.
I saw the Howitzer from Fire Support Base Coral there in the gallery.
It is the No.6 Howitzer from the gun pit at Coral that was overrun on that first night of fighting.
The gun pit that was, in true Australian fashion, retaken soon after and the gun reclaimed.
It says a lot about the way you fought, it says a lot about the way in which you died. Always looking to go on the offensive, never turning back.
This was but one action in a long and tough battle. A battle “like looking death in the eyes” according to one veteran from the engagement.
When you look through the combat diaries from 1 RAR and 3 RAR for May, you get a feel for the level of the engagement  -  day and night, week in, week out heavy enemy action.
Patrols and contacts.
Sniper fire and mortar attacks.
Mass attacks against both fire support bases.
At one stage the order was issued to fix bayonets to advance on the enemy. And through it all, you, the troops, displayed all that is great and good about Australia's defence force.
Not everyone returns from war and the battle of Coral and Balmoral it was the same. 26 brave young Australians lost their lives, men in the prime of their lives  -  11 Regulars and 15 Nashos.
Today we honour the memory of the fallen. Today they are our silent partners in this great national reflection.
Though their families are with us still I would say this to them. We honour your loss and we thank you for their sacrifice. We also honour the veterans here with us today, from that great battle.
We have not always been good at thanking our Vietnam veterans.
In fact at, times we've been very bad at it.
The time has well and truly come to turn the page and to turn the corner.
To thank you all on behalf of a grateful nation for doing your duty to the nation.
After the first engagements then Lieutenant Colonel Philip Bennett, Commanding Officer of 1RAR sent around a message to all units involved saying: “We will all remember this day with pride in our achievements”.
Lieutenant Colonel, now General Bennett was absolutely right. You should be proud of your achievements.
We are proud of your achievements, we are proud of your achievements in the profession of arms.
So, on this, the 40th anniversary of the Battle of Fire support Bases Coral and Balmoral, let us never forget our men and women in uniform.
Those who have worn the uniform and those who still in conflicts abroad wear the uniform today.
Because there is no higher calling in this great nation of Australia, than to wear our nation's uniform.


Tonight I want to speak to you about the Government's approach to sustainability and in particular, climate change.
I want to discuss the need for leadership from the international community in responding to the long-term sustainability and security challenges of energy, food and water resources.
Second, I want to discuss the importance of business leadership in Australia's response to the challenges of climate change and sustainability.
Third, I want to outline the leadership that the Government is taking on sustainability and a long-term strategy to address climate change, including how we plan to advance the climate change and sustainability policy agenda.
Global leadership to tackle sustainability challenges and global security threats: Energy, food, water and climate change
Since the Government came to office almost six months ago, we have set out a long term vision of building a modern, competitive Australia capable of meeting the challenges of the 21st century  -  to secure the nation's future and the future for working families.
It is a vision cast within the context of a rapidly changing global economy and a fast-evolving global security environment.
Not too long ago, the argument that the next major threats to global security might come from shortages of food and water, competition for energy resources and the impacts of climate change, would probably have been considered well outside of the mainstream.
That has now changed.
The pace of growth in the developing world has created a resources crunch. Energy prices have soared as demand has outstripped supply.
The age of cheap oil and gas is over, and energy security is now recognised as a key factor in geopolitics and a major driver of long-term national security strategies.
At the same time we have witnessed food shortages and extraordinary inflation in food prices, resulting from rising costs of fertilisers, irrigation and transport, combined with poor harvests in many countries.
Experts are warning of the risk of future conflict in many regions over access to fresh water, with 500 million people living in countries facing chronic water shortages.
And as each year and even each month passes, we're presented with more sobering analyses of the scale of the climate crisis.
Last week we saw reports of a major scientific research project, conducted by eleven institutions around the world including the University of Melbourne and published in the current edition of the journal Nature.
This project has for the first time formally linked global warming caused by human activity to many recorded changes occurring in habitats and wildlife around the world.
After reviewing forty years of scientific research, the study concluded that climate change is already having a major impact on biological and natural systems - and at least 90 per cent of environmental damage and disruption can be attributed to global warming caused by human activity.
These impacts are being recorded after a rise in temperature of only 0.6 degrees.
Climate modelling clearly suggests we are facing a much greater temperature rise in the future.
In the years ahead, the trends that are driving these challenges  -  finite resources, economic development and climate change  -  will become more pronounced, and will have a greater impact on global security.
It is critically important therefore that the international community addresses the challenges of climate change, energy security, food security and water security with urgency.
These are humanitarian challenges; they are environmental challenges, and they are security challenges.
The security threat is highlighted in the food riots reported in recent weeks in more than a dozen countries including Bangladesh, Haiti, Indonesia and several African nations.
Climate change also presents a long term threat to global security.
The international community must also develop practical strategies for climate change adaptation.
There are hundreds of millions of people in the heavily populated mega delta regions in South, East and Southeast Asia who will be at great risk as climate change accelerates, and the international community must work to address these dangers.
Without making a specific connection between climate change and Cyclone Nargis, the current human calamity in Burma demonstrates the vulnerability of developing nations to the impact of increasingly frequent extreme weather events.
If I may digress for one moment on the matter of Burma: I know there are widespread concerns about whether aid contributions are in fact getting through to those who need it, but I am assured that donations are making it through.
I want to pass on the message from Tim Costello and other leaders of Australian aid efforts that our donations have succeeded in providing essential food and water to over 300,000 victims, saving many thousands of lives. No Australian should hold back from donating, because those donations are making a great difference on the ground.
Australia is seeking to play a constructive role internationally in addressing the long-term sustainability and security challenges.
We have already at Bali played a significant role in the negotiations on the new global climate change deal. In addition, we are one of the first donor countries to integrate climate change adaptation into our international development assistance programs.
Australia is active too across the range of global sustainability challenges.
We have recently taken practical steps to help address the food crisis, with a total contribution of $90 million to the World Food Program.
In addition to a contribution of over $60 million provided earlier in the financial year, we recently announced a donation of $30 million to the World Food Program's emergency appeal - to help address critical gaps in its food aid operations as a result of rising food and fuel prices.
Australia has also stepped up its calls for international trade policy reform. The Doha Round of trade talks provides a critical opportunity for achieving trade liberalisation in international agricultural markets, to the benefit of developing nations.
Australian Government agencies are also working on long-term food security and water supply initiatives in developing nations.
Australia will participate in the UN's Food and Agriculture Organisation high-level conference on World Food Security in early June, to help coordinate international responses to the food security crisis.
Australia will strongly support such international efforts to provide leadership in addressing the sustainability and security challenges of food security, water shortages, energy security, climate change and resources sustainability in general. These constitute a new and critical agenda for global action.
The role of business leadership in addressing sustainability challenges
Leadership from the business community is critically important to our ability to meet the nation's future challenges  -  particularly the challenge of climate change.
The National Business Leadership Forum on Sustainability has been encouraging corporate social responsibility and sustainability reporting for over a decade.
It has helped move sustainability and corporate responsibility from the margins to the mainstream of corporate Australia.
In advance of the Corporate Responsibility Index awards announcements in a few minutes, I would like to congratulate all of tonight's winners and nominees.
I would also like to announce a new initiative relating to the Government's own support for business leadership.
Tonight I am pleased to announce that the Government has committed $2 million for the St James Ethics Centre to work with Australian businesses to develop their capacity to identify and adopt more responsible business practices.
This new project is about working cooperatively with businesses to promote corporate social responsibility  -  not because they are forced to do so, but because they choose to.
Many of the businesses represented here tonight have led the way.
This new funding will allow the St James Ethics Centre to engage many more Australian businesses in identifying and adopting more responsible business practices  -  particularly small and medium sized companies, whose resources are often more limited.
Business leadership on climate change
Turning specifically to Australia's strategy to address climate change, I want to make it clear that the Government regards the leadership of businesses as critical in determining the effectiveness of that strategy.
Climate change is the great economic, environmental and moral challenge of our time.
Yet Australian government policies have for too long been stuck in a bygone era, neglecting and downplaying the gravity of the climate crisis.
That is now changing.
I applaud the way that during those years, leaders in the business community, research centres and community organisations stepped into the policy vacuum and worked hard to inform public debate and help develop practical solutions to climate change.
The new Australian Government recognises climate change as an urgent yet long-term priority.
But this does not mean the need for business leadership is any less than in recent years.
In fact now that the Government has a comprehensive plan of action, the need for business leadership on sustainability challenges is greater than ever.
Governments must create the right frameworks and incentives, but business leadership is needed in adopting efficiency measures, mobilising capital, creating new markets, developing new technologies, driving innovation, deepening our skills base and developing partnerships across the whole community.
Government, the business community, scientific experts and community organisations must work together if we are to tackle the challenges of climate change and seize the long-term opportunities opening up for Australia in low carbon energy technologies and environmental services.
That's why, from Opposition last year, we convened a Climate Change Summit.
The Summit did not just help inform the Government's policy approach  -  it also helped in developing common ground between different sides of the policy debate who had not been talking to each other.
Last month's 2020 Summit showed the debate is well and truly alive  -  and the Summit presented many constructive ideas that we are now reviewing.
Government leadership on the challenges of sustainability and climate change
The Government accepts its own responsibility to provide practical leadership in our response to climate change  -  with practical measures to reduce our own environmental footprint and measures to harness savings from more efficient use of energy and water.
In March this year, I established an internal Government Taskforce to examine a range of options to improve the sustainability of government operations  -  reducing energy and water use and increasing the recycling of waste.
I have received a draft report from the Taskforce in recent days. It shows that government agencies have a long way to go in implementing sustainability practices.
The report notes National Audit Office data stating that only 21 per cent of government offices had energy efficient lighting installed.
The Audit Office has also estimated that the Government could save $10 million annually if agencies were more proactive in energy and water efficiency measures.
The draft report highlights the fact that government agencies face many of the same barriers that business organisations face  -  competing priorities, capacity constraints, institutional resistance, a lack of access to capital and conflicting incentives.
My hope is that in meeting these challenges within Government, we can also help other businesses overcome these barriers.
We need to look at new and innovative ways of financing sustainable practices, and ensuring the right incentives are in place to reduce our environmental footprint across government.
The Taskforce will be undertaking additional analysis before it presents its final report to me mid year - with an implementation plan to roll out across Government.
This will include action to:
     * improve the energy efficiency of our buildings  -  both those we own and those we lease
     * use water more wisely in the face of the current water crisis
     * use government purchasing power for more efficient office equipment
     * reduce emissions from the government car fleet and look at alternatives to travel like greater use of video conferencing.
I will be taking an active interest in ensuring that we roll out an ambitious sustainability agenda across Government.
This practical action on our own sustainability challenges complements the Government's broader and long-term strategy to tackle climate change.
There are three pillars of the Government's long-term response to climate change.
The first is to help shape an effective global solution
We began this within minutes of being sworn into Government, when at Government House I signed the instruments for the ratification of the Kyoto Protocol.
That step sent an important message to the global community that Australia now wants to be part of the global solution.
We made an important contribution at the Bali conference a few days later, with Penny Wong co-chairing one of the final sessions that helped to forge the Bali Roadmap  -  even though she had been in the job for just a few days.
Ahead of Copenhagen, we are continuing to work towards a global agreement.
We must reach a global agreement on substantial cuts in the emission of dangerous greenhouse gases.
This is why it's especially critical that the United States, India and China approach these negotiations with a determination to reach a deal.
Achieving substantial reductions will take time even after we've begun to take action. So we can't afford to have these negotiations drag out year after year. We certainly can't afford to repeat the saga of the Doha trade round, where government officials have been dragging their feet to negotiations for almost seven years.
The second pillar of our climate change strategy is to reduce Australia's emissions along the lowest cost path.
Emissions trading is particularly important to achieving this goal, because it will generate market incentives, mobilise investor capital and accelerate innovations that will help drive emissions down.
Accelerating the takeup of renewable energy is also critical to reducing our emissions. The Government is introducing an expanded national renewable energy target to source 20 per cent of electricity from renewable sources by 2020.
Australia has abundant renewable energy resources  -  from solar and wind, to wave energy and geothermal “hot rocks”  -  and this will help to drive innovation and investment in these technologies.
The third pillar of our strategy is adaptation - the changes we make to adapt to the impacts we cannot avoid.
As the interim Garnaut Report noted, Australia is the driest inhabited continent on earth and is more vulnerable to the impacts of climate change than any other industrialised nation.
For different reasons, that exposure is shared by many developing nations in the Pacific region, and our adaptation strategies must take into account regional neighbours who will need assistance in coping with a changing climate.
2008-09 Budget Initiatives
Last week's Budget delivered on the Government's initial climate change commitments.
The Budget contained measures totalling $2.3 billion over five years to help reduce Australia's greenhouse emissions, adapt to climate change, and ensure we show global leadership in the transition to a low emissions economy.
We now have a Department of Climate Change that is leading the Government's efforts to tackle climate change, including the implementation of emissions trading.
We are investing in clean energy technology  -  clean coal, renewables and new R&amp;D initiatives.
We are investing in $500 million to a National Clean Coal Initiative, $500 million dollars in a Renewable Energy Fund, and $150 million in an Energy Innovation Fund to accelerate clean energy research and development.
We are investing $240 million in Clean Business Australia including measures for green building, manufacturers and the development of environmentally-friendly products.
We are investing $500 million in a Green Car Innovation Fund to encourage the Australian car industry to develop and manufacture low emission cars.
We are also investing in household and community based measures to respond to climate change  -  including $300 million in Green Loans through which 200,000 Australian households invest in clean energy technologies, and $150 million in solar power rebates of up to $8,000 for up to 6,000 homes in 2008-09.
To ensure that rebates get to the lower and middle income households that need them most, the Government will introduce a means test for this plan. The total investment in this program will be $150 million over three years  -  as we promised at the election.
We are also investing $481 million in supporting more than 9,000 schools to go solar.
Australia is also investing in adaptation to climate change in our region. We are providing $150 million over three years to meet high-priority climate change adaptation needs, particularly in East Timor and the island states of the Pacific who are at greatest risk from the impacts of climate change.
The next stage of the Government's Climate Change Response: Emissions Trading
Domestically, our next major challenge now is to complete the design of Australia's emissions trading scheme.
Emissions trading is a central element in creating the market incentives to drive the low carbon energy revolution.
As Sir Nicholas Stern has said, climate change is the greatest market failure the world has ever seen.
Emissions trading aims to address that market failure. It is a major economic reform.
A carbon cap and trade system will mobilise capital and channel research efforts into the most important economic challenge for our generation  -  the low carbon energy revolution.
In the long run, clean energy worldwide will generate jobs, trade and business successes on an even greater scale than the global information technology revolution of recent decades.
But what's needed is a market mechanism to start to level the playing field for clean energy technologies.
As the President of the United States' Environmental Defense Fund, Fred Krupps, has documented in a book released in the US in recent weeks, there is an astonishing array of technologies emerging from research in the clean energy sector:
“Securing our planet against calamity will require a second industrial revolution... We will need to harness energy from the sun, the waves, living organisms and the heat embedded in the planet. We will need to reinvent automobiles, clean up emissions from the immense and rapidly growing coal infrastructure, use the energy we have far more efficiently and put an end to tropical deforestation... No single technology will stop global warming but there is a silver bullet: A cap on carbon that will launch all these solutions into the mainstream.” 
(Earth: The Sequel, chapter 1)
It is critically important that Australia is an early starter in the global clean energy revolution.
Having an emissions trading scheme is crucial because it will allow investors to price carbon and make rational investment decisions that will drive research, innovation and energy efficiency measures that will allow us start turning the corner on carbon emissions and climate change.
It will have substantial long term consequences on the effectiveness of Australia's response to climate change.
That is why the Government is committed to introducing emissions trading in 2010.
The consultation processes that we are now undertaking are very important.
We recognise the long-term implications of the design of emissions trading for our economy and for many industries.
Emissions trading is important to securing Australia's future economic prosperity and we will continue to work with affected industries, in particular those in trade exposed sectors and strongly affected domestic sectors.
The emission trading scheme will have maximal coverage of greenhouse gases and sectors to the extent that it is practical. The broader the scheme's coverage, the lower the cost of reducing carbon emissions. This spreads the burden of reducing emissions across the community more fairly.
We recognise this will involve some hard decisions, but if we're serious about preparing Australia for the long-term climate change challenge we must make difficult decisions now.
Energy efficiency and equity measures
Beyond establishing the emissions trading scheme to put a price on carbon, energy efficiency is will be a major priority in our efforts to tackle climate change.
Energy efficiency delivers a double dividend - reducing emissions immediately, bringing down the overall cost of meeting targets and increasing energy productivity across the economy.
Australia's past record in improving energy efficiency in most sectors is poor when compared to our OECD partners. For example, research by the Australian Bureau of Statistics has estimated that around 40 per cent of Australian homes have no insulation, making them more expensive to heat and more expensive to cool.
The National Framework for Energy Efficiency identified potential energy savings of between 20 and 35 percent based on an average 4-year payback period.
Improving energy efficiency will require greater information provision, greater investment in research and development, and ensuring that there are adequate incentives to embrace efficiency measures. Business leadership is especially important in this area.
The third item on the Government's list of next priorities is to address the equity and distributional consequences of acting on climate change.
We can't hide from the fact that there is a cost associated with acting on climate change.
We know that energy costs will rise. As the former Prime Minister said last year:
"I think everybody should accept that, over time, things like electricity will become more expensive, as, over time, water will become more expensive, and there's not much point anybody saying otherwise..."
(Lateline 5 February 2007)
While acting on climate change will increase some prices, the costs of acting responsibly now are far less than the costs of continued neglect.
We will therefore ensure there are measures to help families adjust to rising costs.
That is why we have already begun investing in programs that help families take practical action at home to reduce their energy bills.
Australia's response to climate change requires the participation of the whole community. Our capacity to respond effectively will be diminished unless we respond as a nation.
Public sector, private and community sectors.
Households and industry.
State and Territory and Federal governments.
All governments, all sectors of the economy.
And across the political divide as well.
When we held the Climate Change Summit just over a year ago here in Parliament House, I quoted Californian Governor Schwarzenegger's description of climate change as the first great ‘post-partisan political issue'.
As Senator John McCain confirmed in a major speech in the past week, all three presidential candidates in the United States have ambitious targets for reducing emissions. Similarly, both sides of the political debate in the United Kingdom strongly support tough action on climate change.
Just as I said this to the Liberal Party in government, I now say the same to the Liberal Party in opposition: Climate change should not be another political football.
We must avoid the temptations of short-term politics and the usual scare campaigns.
Climate change requires serious debate  -  and a serious resolve to act before the cost to those who follow us becomes too great.
We should make every effort to work in a spirit of bipartisanship to forge a long-term consensus on Australia's response to climate change so that the investor community can make long-term investments in low carbon energy infrastructure with confidence.
Of course there will be differing, competing and sometimes conflicting views on some aspects of policy, but the policy debate should be conducted within a joint commitment to Australia's long-term national interests, and framed within the economic cost of action versus inaction.
The Australian community is much more interested in those of us who serve in this Parliament working together to find solutions.
They also expect businesses to provide leadership on climate change  -  in their own power consumption, their investment policies and across all of their business activities.
I appreciate the work that the Forum is doing to promote that kind of long-term thinking.
The Government shares the belief that rising to the challenge of climate change is among our greatest obligations to future generations.
I wish you the very best as the Forum continues tomorrow, and I look forward to working together on the challenges ahead.


Acknowledgments
Thank you Ann Sanders for that kind introduction.
Mr Robin Crawford, Chairman of the Sydney Cancer Centre
Professor Chris O'Brien, Board Director, the Sydney Cancer Centre Foundation
Professor Michael Boyer, Director, the Sydney Cancer Centre
It is an honour to be here today to offer my support for such a worthy cause.
Introduction
Australia is fortunate in many ways.
We have world-class health practitioners.
We have world-class health researchers.
And we have a proud record of achievement in medical science.
However, we also have much more to do.
There remains so much that we can do better and so much that we still don't know.
The gap between our aspirations and our achievements remains large  -  perhaps more so in cancer than in other areas, as cancer remains a large-scale killer.
Health policy challenges
The challenge is to not only close this gap, but to do so in the face of new pressures transforming health policy.
We face rising expectations and demands, alongside an ageing population, an explosion in chronic disease and rapid growth in the costs of medical technology.
These changes bring with them challenges for our entire health system  -  and not least for oncology.
The turmoil, and too often the tragedy, of cancer is something that has touched the lives of millions of Australian families.
Nearly half a million Australians are diagnosed with cancer each year.
The Australian Institute of Health and Welfare estimates that one in three men and one in four women will be directly affected by cancer before the age of 75.
Nearly 40,000 Australians each year die from cancer  -  accounting for nearly a third of all male deaths and a quarter of all female deaths.
Around three-quarters of cancers are less threatening types of skin cancer (non-melanocytic skin cancer).
Many forms of cancer are preventable  -  and are driven by similar risk factors to other major chronic diseases.
Smoking, alcohol abuse, poor diet and a lack of exercise are the main culprits  -  and we will need a transformation within health policy to tackle them.
This is a transformation that must change behaviours and shift cultures  -  among Australians of all ages.
And while prevention is better than cure, we often have neither option.
Ongoing commitment is needed to achieve the new breakthroughs that will save lives  -  and this must be supported by governments.
And until those breakthroughs come, we must rely on earlier detection and more effective treatment.
On early detection, we are making some progress on this front and in the recent Budget we extended bowel cancer screening to all those turning 50, 55 and 65.
And on treatment, our survival rates are also improving. Five-year survival rates for the most common cancers affecting men (prostate) and women (breast) are now more than 80 per cent. 
The patient perspective
Notwithstanding the heroic efforts of many in the health system, there is one perspective that needs a greater focus in health policy, and particularly in the fight against cancer.
That is the patient perspective.
An honest appraisal of how well we, collectively, meet the needs of patients provides the most compelling argument of all for health reform.
Living with cancer can be one of the most difficult experiences imaginable for patients, and for their families and friends.
It can bring the toughest of us back to earth with a thud, as it reminds us of what is truly important in life.
For many Australians, this most difficult time is made all the harder by the complex maze of services  -  Commonwealth and State, public and private  -  that must be navigated.
Having cancer is stressful enough.
But the task of accessing the right testing, treatment and monitoring services should not make it harder still.
We simply must do better on this front, and this desire to do better for patients is at the heart of our Government's commitment to fundamental health reform.
Translating research into patient care
The quality of treatment patients receive is also critical.
This is underpinned by the quality of our research base, our ability to translate research into practice, and the infrastructure, workforce and systems that support this.
In Washington recently I had dinner with a group of Australians working in the United States.
One of them was Dr Richard Pestell, Director of the Kimmel Cancer Centre.
Like many of the people here at the Sydney Cancer Centre, he has dedicated his life to the fight against cancer.
And like many others I have talked to in this field, Dr Pestell stressed to me the importance of cooperation and knowledge-sharing in the fight against cancer.
If we are to close the gap between aspiration and achievement in health, we need to bridge the divide between research and clinical practice.
I want to see Australians receive the best care available, and for this to occur we must be able to translate the best research into practice.
This requires cooperation not only among researchers, but also between researchers and clinicians to give our knowledge and our breakthroughs the widest possible reach.
Through the recent Budget, the Government is investing a record level of support for cancer research centres and projects.
In 2006-07, the previous government allocated $58 million to cancer specific programs. In 2008-09, the Government is allocating $214 million to cancer specific programs.
The Government's increased funding is particularly focused on supporting cancer research.
The Government's commitment includes (though is not limited to):
     * An extra $87 million over three years to expand National Bowel Cancer Screening.
     * $15 million over three years to support young people with cancer for the first time, through CanTeen.
     * $15 million over three years for independent clinical trials of drugs and research into cancer treatment and care.
     * $15 million over five years to set up two dedicated prostate cancer research centres.
     * $15 million over two years to help build a Children's Cancer Centre at the Women's and Children's Hospital in Adelaide.
     * $15 million over two years towards the establishment of the Olivia Newton-John Cancer Centre at the Austin Hospital in Melbourne.
     * $5.1 million over three years for the operation of the National Centre for Gynaecological Cancers, under the auspices of Cancer Australia.
Sydney Cancer Centre
The Government is also a proud supporter of the Sydney Cancer Centre.
I'm pleased to announce that the Government's 2008-09 Budget provides an initial contribution of $50 million towards the Sydney Cancer Centre.
I can also announce today that the Government will continue its engagement with the Centre and, subject to a business case, be favourably disposed towards additional financial support.
The success of the Sydney Cancer Centre  -  and its potential going forward  -  in no small part rests on its capacity to integrate research and practice.
The Sydney Cancer Centre has an enviable record as a centre of research.
But it is the holistic approach to cancer care where I see the real innovation and potential.
By translating research into practical strategies for patients  -  to treat the disease, to deal with causes and help with recovery  -  we can deliver better care and improve quality of life.
Through co-location, the two-way interaction of research and practice can sometimes transform both research and practice for the better.
Let me acknowledge your support for the Sydney Cancer Centre in helping to close the gap between aspiration and achievement.
Fundraising is a crucial part of this equation  -  and success would not be possible without it.
The Centre's success also depends on the hard work of many dedicated staff  -  who I would like to acknowledge.
This is a bold project with the potential to save the lives of many, and improve quality of life for many more.
Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen, it is my pleasure to be with you on this occasion.
In congratulating the Centre for all it has achieved, and in wishing it every success going forward, I would like to pay special tribute to a great Australian.
Professor Chris O'Brien.
Chris has been a tireless campaigner in the interests of not only better cancer treatment and research, but also in  promoting awareness of cancer and its impacts on people and families.
The fight against cancer is a long-term one that may test us for decades to come. 
It is a fight that will test our determination and resolve, but one that we must front up to if we are to close the gap between our aspirations and our achievements as a nation.
Chris, you should know that you have made a difference in this fight, that your efforts have borne fruit, and that the fight will go on.
Thank you.


Acknowledgements
George Megalogenis; John Cain  -  President of the Board of State Library of Victoria; Anne-Marie Schwirtlitch - CEO, State Library of Victoria; Henry Rosenbloom  -  CEO; Scribe Publications; Staff of Scribe Publications and Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen.
Introduction
Thanks Henry  -  I'd like to say I'm glad to be here this morning. But then again as I reflected on whether I was or not, I'm not so sure. It seems to me that I've seen this book somewhere before George.
Actually, if I remember rightly, it's already been launched  -  indeed not by just one Prime Minister before me, but by two Prime Ministers before me. Mr Howard, back in 2006, on May 31st, and then two days later by Mr Keating, on June 2nd.
And now, George has tacked on a couple of chapters at the end, refreshed the cover and fixed up some of his typos, and hey presto - he's got a third Prime Minister to launch the book today. To paraphrase the great Oscar Wilde to be launched by one Prime Minister is unusual, to be launched by two Prime Ministers is exotic and to be launched by three Prime Minsters, George boarders on the extreme. I'll let you explain that later.
Now George is just the sort of detail-oriented journalist who'd have a crack at a politician for going around the country doing the same thing, re-launching old policies and pretending those old policies are in fact new policies.
Clearly, George has been observing politicians for so long that he's now behaving like one. In fact it gets worse, because this isn't the only launch he's doing for this latest re-run. He's already re-launched this edition, in Canberra last week. I'm told he was out at Avid Reader in Brisbane last night, re-launching it again. And I'm informed that he's re-launching it again with Barrie Cassidy and David Marr at Gleebooks in Sydney in a week's time. And yet again in June, with Barrie Cassidy and with Annabel Crabb at Readings Hawthorn. Politicians might get accused of going round the country launching the same policy in each city under a different badge, but relaunching the same product twice in the same city takes a particular style. This book has had more introductions than Dame Nellie Melba had farewells, but I like it and that's why I'm here.
In fact when I became leader of the Parliamentary Labor party at the end of 2006, this book together with a long tome on early childhood education by a gentlemen called Heckman made up my summer reading in 2006-2007. So for the unfolding strategy George for the year which followed you are partly to blame.
Today I won't repeat Paul Keating's characteristically self-effacing remark when he launched the book just two years ago, Paul put it in these terms:
“Would I write a better book? Well, of course I would. I write better than George and I know more than George. But George is not me and he is not John Howard and his third party view is worth something. Is it worth the world? No. But is it worth something? Indeed, it is.” (Paul Keating, 2 June 2006)
Core argument
Let me turn to the book itself. As I said before I like this book and I've read it. I read it at an important time in the political evolution of the Labor party as we moved from Opposition into what became the world longest election campaign in 2007. Culminating in the events of late last year.
Like all of George's writing, it's clear; it's crisp; it's well-informed and it has an argument even if you can chose to disagree with the argument.
So let me now to contest the argument that George advances:
     * Firstly, Mr Keating and Mr Howard share similar views about an internationally open, market-based economy.
     * And secondly, while they have fundamentally similar economic policies what distinguishes them is different perspectives on national identity and what's broadly described as the culture wars.
In short, George's argument about Mr Keating and Mr Howard is economic similarities versus cultural differences and I'll let him contest the gross implication of his thesis when he responds.
I know George delivers the analysis with nuance and with caveats and many more than I've just articulated. But still, I think he sometimes blurs some very fundamental differences between the two. Mr Keating and Mr Hawke were very different leaders from Mr Howard.
I'd make just three points, two relating to Mr Keating and Mr Howard and one further remark much more general in pointing toward the future.
First, the Hawke and Keating Governments delivered a massive program of economic reform, and they didn't shy away from taking on their own political base when they knew it was in the national interest.
Think tariffs.
Think cuts to the marginal tax rate.
Think enterprise bargaining.
Think how unpopular all of those were with the trade union movement of Australia.
Mr Howard, on the other hand, never took on his own political base in the prosecution of any significant economic reform. His reform agenda never moved out of the ideological straightjacket of the 1970s and 1980s.
Think industrial relations.
Think consumption tax.
And think also of the explosion in untargeted welfare.
Second, Mr Keating was a policy-driven leader who is responsive to changing national needs, which Mr Howard was not. Mr Howard was responsive to politics, but not policy.
When the economic circumstances change, and the demands of a competitive economy change, Mr Howard never adjusted and never took the lead when it came to new ideas.
Look at climate change.
Look infrastructure policy.
Look at education policy.
Look at early childhood education.
There's a mountain of economic evidence about the importance of those policy domains to Australia's future. Mr Howard in eleven years never sustained an interest in any of those policies.
All you have is the occasional reluctant capitulation when the political heat reaches boiling point  -  like the reluctant acceptance of emissions trading last year. Mr Keating by contrast learns on the job, embracing new policies during the 1990s like CAP competition policy, Working Nation in terms of new approaches to labour market policies, and universal superannuation.
George to be fair to him, doesn't entirely miss this point  -  he concedes it in part and I turn particularly to page 363:
“Ironically, [Mr Howard] left office with the economy stronger than he found it, but with a reform legacy less substantial than Hawke and Keating, because he went too far with the labour market, and because he seemed more interested in offering bribes over policy substance.”
What do these conflicting narratives of economic reform for the last decade have to say about the decade that now lies ahead?
Less than six months into the new Government, we have outlined the core elements of our policy strategy for the future:
     * First, a policy of responsible economic management, based on strong surpluses, fighting the fight against inflation and putting downward pressure on interest rates
     * Second, a vigorous program of microeconomic reform, based on productivity, participation and population:
         * On productivity, we have begun an ambitious program of reinvestment in human capital formation, in physical capital formation (infrastructure) and in business deregulation through the COAG reform process
         * On participation, we have embraced a program of tax reform, reform of child care payments, as well as a new approach to preventative health care  -  all designed to enhance workforce participation in the long term, given the particular challenges emerging from an ageing Australia
         * On population, the Government has already announced an ambitious expansion to the migration program in order to deal with long and short-term skill needs; the long-term neglect of skills policy over the past decade; and once again the impact of the ageing of our population
     * Third, the Government recognises rather than rejects the strategic economic challenge represented by global climate change and associated challenges to energy security, water security and food security  -  and the need for a program of national and global action to respond to each.
     * Fourth, the Government's policy strategy also unapologetically embraces social inclusion, and I've just come from the first meeting of the Government's new National Social Inclusion Board with the Deputy Prime Minister Julia Gillard. And through Social Inclusion which we unapologetically embrace, we believe that there is a need through Government to intervene and in partnership with corporate Australia and community associations as well to assist those suffering from structural disadvantage and to enable them to have greater economic and social opportunities in the future. Failure to act in this area in fact creates a long-term and entrenched social problem that comes at a significant economic cost in its own terms unless dealt with.
     * Fifth, an activist foreign policy which seeks to enhance global, regional and national security and economic opportunities for Australia and to enhance an international rules-based order given the challenges that now present themselves through the rise of China, the rise of India, the continued challenges of terrorism, the need to combat the re-emergence of global protectionism and the need to spread the tent on the global reach of economic development.
For us this constitutes an ambitious policy framework for reform for the future. By contrast, we continue to identify a combination of policy irresponsibility and policy inertia on the part of our political opponents:
     * The Liberals today fail to embrace the key disciplines of economic responsibility by refusing to recognise the inflation challenge; by describing the inflation challenge as a ‘fairy tale'; by maintaining that there is no economic case to cut government spending; by raiding the surplus to the tune of $22 billion without offering any savings  -  thereby putting upward pressure on inflation and upward pressure on interest rates.
     * The Liberals continue their disinterest in microeconomic reform from the decade that has just gone by. They refuse to recognise that there is a problem with declining productivity growth, let alone advancing new problems to reverse that decline; nor is there any evidence of responsible policy to improve workforce participation.
     * Further the Liberals continue in a state of denial on climate change  -  resorting to political populism rather than engaging in the substantive debate on the future of emissions trading, the future of renewable energy and the future of energy efficiency.
Therefore, if we're interested in the future, the contrast I would submit George is clear:
     * The Government advances a program of policy reform for the future  -  Which will not be without it's controversy.
     * The Liberal Opposition retreats into its political shell  -  and continues to play the same game of populist politics that dictated the policies of much of the last decade.
The nation, of course, has suffered from a wasted decade  -  a decade of squandered opportunity and a decade when instead of investing the proceeds of the mining boom, these proceeds were instead squandered on consumption.
Therefore, we would with absolute confidence argue that there are two clear and competing narratives for the nation's future  -  one based on considered policy activism; the Liberal alternative at this stage based on a cocktail of political populism and their strong historical suit  -  policy inertia.
So having added that to my warm words of welcome and response to George's narrative and the contribution which George has made to political debate. It is with great pleasure that today, for the 27th time, I launch, relaunch and launch again, George Megalogenis' book, The Longest Decade.
I leave to one side George's analysis as to whether I should be described as ‘manic', ‘disciplined', ‘shameless' or, much more distressingly, ‘Geoffrey Boycott'.
In fact, I'll let all those go through to the keeper.
Which perhaps was the greatest hallmark of Boycott's career.
I commend the book to you all.


Introduction
I'd like to thank Homelessness Australia for the invitation to speak at the 5th National Homelessness Conference.
Let me also say that it is a pleasure to be in Adelaide. This city has long been a centre of innovation and creativity, not just in the arts, but also in business and in public policy.
That is why it is fitting that we gather here to work towards finding creative solutions to tackle one of Australia's most complex and pressing social challenges.
Today, I'd like to begin by acknowledging the many people in this room who work tirelessly to provide support for people who are homeless.
I'd like to thank you, I commend your hard work.
But today I'd like to enlist your support for a great new enterprise: how we as a nation can begin to turn the homelessness crisis around for the long term rather than just apply band-aids in the short term.
As a Government, we have committed to begin the process of finding a new approach to prevention where possible, and where prevention fails, then breaking the cycle of homelessness.
And we know that some of the best experience, information and advice will be found outside of Government.
That's where you come in.
As a government and as a community, we need to learn from your experiences.
That is what the Green Paper I am releasing today is all about.
This is the first national Green Paper on homelessness ever.
And the policy that will follow will be the first national White Paper on homelessness ever.
The Green Paper, and the broader consultation process of which it is part, aims to promote discussion, draw out bold new ideas and to identify evidence-based approaches to reduce homelessness.
This process began at the 2020 summit when Tanya Plibersek and Tim Costello led the discussion on the future of housing and homelessness as part of the future of sustainable local communities.
This Green Paper takes that process of consultation forward.
I would like to thank the Steering Group appointed to oversee the Green Paper: Tony Nicholson, Executive Director of the Brotherhood of St Laurence; company director and philanthropist, Anna Buduls; and Heather Nancarrow, Director of the Queensland Centre for Domestic and Family Violence Research.
Together with the Department of Families and Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs the Steering Group have done a remarkable job and I appreciate their efforts over the past few months.
With the release of this Green Paper I encourage all of you to play a role in developing an improved long term national response to homelessness by giving us your views on the challenges raised in the paper.
Over the past year, I have visited several homelessness services around Australia and witnessed the reality of Australian homelessness that many of you deal with every day of your professional lives.
I've spoken to people experiencing homelessness in its various forms.
I've shared a joke with them. I've had a cup of tea with them, and I've learned something of their experiences and how they came to be homeless.
In the Mission Australia Centre in Surry Hills in Sydney I met a man who just six months before seemed to have his life on track.
He had a good job, a relationship and a solid income.
He found himself homeless after being knocked off his feet by financial and personal events beyond his control. His experience, like many others, demonstrated how easy it is to have the rug pulled from underneath you.
At the Hanover homeless shelter in Southbank in Melbourne I spoke to some of the 50 men and women staying there for the night.
They were mainstream Australians who had been knocked sideways by unexpected circumstances.
What I learned from these people is that there is no one path into homelessness.
Every person has a different story and a different set of circumstances which brought them to homelessness.
The immediate reasons for homelessness lie in family breakdown, job loss, sickness, drug addiction, gambling addiction and domestic violence.
Homelessness is also a window into the wider debate on Australian disadvantage  -  the rising costs of housing, the rising cost of living, and the particular challenges facing many young people and senior Australians on the fringes of our society.
Yesterday, with the Deputy Prime Minister, I launched the Australian Social Inclusion Board which is tasked with dealing with the overall challenge of tackling disadvantage in Australia.
The board met for the first time yesterday and agreed to devote attention to homelessness but also to responding to joblessness in families and to the needs of disadvantaged children.
Importantly their focus will be on devising ways to intervene early to prevent homelessness.
The facts of homelessness are well known to most in this room:
     * Each night, around 100,000 Australians are homeless.
     * 46,000 of these are young people under 24 years old.
     * 10,000 are children under the age of 12.
     * 17,000 are indigenous.
     * 6,000 are senior Australians over the age of 65.
The cost of homelessness to individuals and their families is large.
It's not just an economic cost.
It's also an acute social cost.
For children, homelessness affects school routines and friendships, education and employment.
Worse still, experiencing homelessness as a child makes adult homelessness more likely.
That's why we need to turn the corner.
The Rudd Government's Approach to Homelessness
The new Australian Government is committed to working towards long term solutions to address homelessness.
But we do want to build a strong economy that delivers for working families, working Australians, and those that are doing it tough  -  In other words, an economy that extends opportunity to all Australians.
As a Labor government we are committed to a principle of social solidarity that includes private philanthropy, community action, and public responsibility to protect the most vulnerable.
But let me also say this: we don't have an old-fashioned approach to these challenges.
This means adapting a philosophy of mutual partnership and mutual responsibility.
We want to support people who have decided to make a change in their life to continue on that path. But we don't want to create a culture of dependency.
That means finding creative solutions to complex problems.
It means investing in solutions which deal with the causes of homelessness.
The new Australian Government has already made a start. We have begun to address several parts of the complex challenge of homelessness.
One of our first commitments in this area was to provide $150 million over five years to build 600 homes across Australia for families and individuals who are homeless.
We have also committed $100 million for long term supported accommodation for people with disabilities.
These are modest but important steps in the right direction.
Other important wheels of change have started to turn.
In March 2008, COAG agreed to reform the Special Purpose Payments, including those that relate to housing and homelessness.
St Vincent de Paul reported recently that nearly 50 per cent of people coming into homelessness services across Australia are private renters in difficulty.
The Government will establish a new Agreement between the Commonwealth and the States and Territories  -  the National Affordable Housing Agreement which will include homelessness as a key area of focus.
It will incorporate both the Supported Accommodation Assistance Program and the Commonwealth State Housing Agreement.
The National Affordable Housing Agreement will provide greater flexibility for states and territories to allocate housing and homelessness resources to produce the best outcomes for homeless people.
In addition to our commitment to build new housing, in last week's budget we provided $2.3 million to RecLink to roll out their sporting and cultural programs like the Choir of Hard Knocks in every State and Territory.
Beyond homelessness directly, the Government has also initiated action across a number of fronts to tackle disadvantage in its first five months in office:
     * As part of the Government's additional $5.9 billion over five years to kick start the Education Revolution election commitments, the Government has committed $534 million to provide universal access to 15 hours a week, 40 weeks a year of play-places learning for all four year olds by 2013;
     * The Government has committed $1.2 billion over five years for Closing the Gap Initiatives including $56.4 million over four years for literacy and numeracy programs and $122.7 million over four years for child and maternal health programs.
     * We are delivering 275,000 additional training places for unemployed Australians and reforming employment services to better assist those facing barriers to work.
     * We have delivered seniors $400 more than they received in the last Coalition Government Budget and Carers $500 more.
     * We have tasked the Henry commission of inquiry to report on long term reforms to payments to retired people by February next year.
     * The Government is investing $290m over the next four years to re-establish the Commonwealth Dental Health program to support up to one million additional consultations and start to tackle public dental waiting lists
     * The Government is also investing $0.5 billion to provide a Teen Dental Plan to help families meet the costs of dental check-ups for teenagers.
Each of these measures will help us in our task of delivering opportunities to those Australians currently at risk of being cast to the margins
Which Way Home - The Green Paper of Homelessness
Through these initiatives the Government has begun work on the challenges of disadvantage, but we fully acknowledge that there is a lot more work to do  -  especially in the area of homelessness.
If we take a hard honest look back over the last decade or more - as a nation we have not done enough to address homelessness.
That is why I asked MPs in the Government to spend time visiting shelters and refuges in their local electorates.
Many of them came back to me and told me that our efforts to reduce homelessness were failing.
They told me that homelessness services weren't able to meet the level of need.
Perhaps more distressing than the number of homeless people in Australia is the fact that on any given night seven out of 10 homeless people are turned away from shelters because there's simply no room at the inn.
We lack the scale or strategic focus to address the multiple causes and effects of homelessness.
We can't guarantee that every homeless person who comes to a homeless shelter will get the best possible outcomes  -  be it in education or employment.
Put simply, our homelessness policies aren't sufficient to deal with the scale of the problem.
That is why in January, the Government announced that we would seek to develop, in consultation with stakeholders, a new approach to homelessness.
I am pleased to be here today to release what is the first step in developing this new approach.
Which Way Home  -  the Green Paper on homelessness - is the Government's first Green Paper.
And its release marks the beginning of a period of widespread public consultation.
We will be holding public consultation sessions in 12 locations across Australia.
These sessions will start next week in Perth.
We are consulting widely because we believe that the best information is held by the people who see it everyday - those who provide support and assistance to homeless people.
Responses and any other ideas will feed into the Government's White Paper.
The White Paper will include a comprehensive national action plan to reduce homelessness by 2020.
Principles for Reform
The new approach to homelessness begins with renewed national leadership  -  to bring a strategic focus and drive a coordinated effort.
We need better access over the long term to stable and affordable housing.
The 2008 Budget has made an important start on tackling the housing affordability crisis with a $1.4 billion package of practical policies.
The Budget includes a $500 million Housing Affordability Fund to drive housing construction activity.
It also established First Home Saver Accounts to help young people get onto the ladder of home ownership. Over the next four years, the Commonwealth will invest around $1 billion in these special accounts to help people save a deposit for a house.
The Government will also provide $622.6 million over four years for the provision of 50,000 affordable rental properties across Australia for low and middle income earners.
But we need to look beyond just providing housing.
We need to increase opportunities for homeless people  -  to participate in the economy and the community.
To have the opportunity to learn and gain new skills and to get back into work.
We also need to strengthen the homelessness service system.
Contact with the homelessness service system should provide a gateway into safe and appropriate accommodation, and then a pathway to social and economic participation.
We need a partnership - at a national level - between mainstream services and homelessness-specific services.
This is a big part of the solution  -  it means many of us cooperating and working better together.
It means all levels of governments working better with organisations who work on the front line  -  like hospitals, mental health crisis services, Centrelink, employment services, courts and police working more closely with women's shelters, youth refuges, hostels and soup vans.
In our efforts to improve outcomes in this area we are guided by the principles of evidence-based policymaking.
Put simply, that means we want to build on what works.
In Australia we have seen several successful initiatives at the state and territory level.
Here in South Australia the Government has brought together the efforts of government with the non-government and business sectors to make a substantial difference.
South Australia set a target to halve rough sleeping by 2010.
The Plan is monitored by Commissioner for Social Inclusion  -  David Cappo  -  who has joined our national Social inclusion Board.
Preliminary data from the ABS show that the plan has led to a reduction in the number of homeless people in South Australia.
This along with many other ideas are worth considering if we want to stop people cycling in and out of homelessness.
We have also seen significant and successful programs outside the immediate sphere of government.
Last year in Sydney, Tanya Plibersek and I visited a homeless shelter run by Mission Australia.
Recently Mission Australia made a deliberate shift to use their funds to provide high quality crisis accommodation to 40 people not 100.
Under the new model clients received a range of services  -  in fact 32 different professional services and training and educational services delivered to these 40 people on site at this homeless service based on their individual needs and strengths.
Services like medical, dentistry, optometry and chiropractic services, TAFE training, life skills  -  and the list goes on.
The objective is simple  -  to equip people with the skills and support necessary to reach their potential.
In conclusion, the new Australian Government recognises that homelessness is an area where we as a community simply must do better.
I said before that homelessness is a window onto Australian disadvantage.
And similarly, the way we as a nation respond to homelessness is a window onto the heart of our community.
The launch of today's Green Paper is a first step on a long journey that I hope will involve input at some level from everyone in this room.
Together, we have a unique opportunity to make a difference to homelessness in Australia.
We owe it to those 100,000 homeless Australians to get this right.


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as one of the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
Six months ago today, the Australian people decided to change the nation's course.
To elect a government for Australia's future.
A government committed to nation-building.
A government that will tackle the long-term challenges of the future: climate change; water; the rise of India and China; and preparing our kids for the future jobs of the 21st century.
A government that will look after the working men and women of our nation.
A government for all Australians.
In the past six months, we've begun laying strong foundations for Australia's future.
Digging the trenches, and pouring the concrete.
We've brought down a responsible Budget.
And we've set up long term plans to invest in the future.
And today I will discuss some plans for how we'll move ahead, building on those foundations.
But first, I come to say thank you.
Thank you to the rank and file members of the Victorian branch who worked tirelessly to see the election of an Australian Labor Government.
Your work helped deliver a two party preferred vote of 54.3 per cent in Victoria.
...The highest primary and the highest two party preferred vote of any State on the mainland.
Your work helped us to win a total of 21 out of Victoria's 37 seats.
As a result we can today give a special welcome to the two Labor candidates who won seats from the Liberal Party:
     * Darren Cheeseman in Corangamite, and
     * Mike Symon in Deakin.
We also welcome Bill Shorten, Richard Marles and Mark Dreyfus into the House of Representatives.
And we also say thank you to all of our Labor candidates who fought hard in seats across the whole state.
In particular, we acknowledge the efforts of two candidates in extremely close contests:
     * Rob Mitchell in McEwen, who  -  subject to the courts' final decision  -  on the most recent count won 49.99 per cent of the vote with a swing of over 6 per cent.
     * And Rodney Cocks in La Trobe, who achieved a vote of 49.49 per cent.
Victoria also elected two new Senators, Jacinta Collins and David Feeney. And re-elected Gavin Marshall.
As we welcome them, we farewell another.
We salute Robert Ray for an extraordinary 27 years of service to the Party.
Robert played a key role in the Hawke and Keating Governments, and he served 12 years of hard labour in opposition. 
We wish him the very best in his retirement. We will miss him.
We will also miss the great John Button, whom we lost recently after his battle with cancer.
John Button was one of the most significant figures in our party in the second half of the twentieth century.
He led the overhaul of the Australian manufacturing industry from days of sclerotic protection to an era of global competitiveness.
Years after his retirement from active political life, he never lost his passion to serve the Labor Party.
We're proud that his illness did not prevent him seeing in the return of an Australian Labor Government.
And we extend our sympathies to his partner Joan and his sons Jamie and Nick, and to his close family.
This morning I also want to thank Premier John Brumby for the policy leadership he has given as Treasurer and Premier.
There's no doubt Victoria has been at the centre of policy leadership and innovation in recent years under Steve Bracks and John Brumby.
Victoria put the national reform agenda on the table three years ago.
Victorian Labor put the spotlight on the need for a long-term strategy to lift productivity and workforce participation.
Victorian Labor led with the emphasis on human capital and especially early childhood development, taking the major step of shifting early childhood education into the Education Department.
Victorian Labor led on health care reform, with the emphasis on prevention through the ‘Go For Your Life' campaign.
And Victorian Labor has led on regulatory reform.
And I particularly want to thank Premier Brumby for Victoria's strong and positive engagement with the Australian Government's COAG reform agenda, which is so critical to building a modern, competitive economy.
Our values and priorities
It is a great honour to lead the first Australian Labor Government of the 21st century.
Ours is a modern Labor Government, committed to building a modern Australia, capable of meeting the challenges of the 21st century  -  to secure the nation's future, as well as securing the future for the nation's families.
In meeting those challenges of the future, we draw inspiration from more than a century's history of reformist Labor Governments.
We stand in the proud tradition of previous Labor Governments, at the reforming centre of Australian politics.
We are a party of responsible economic management.
We are a party of long-term economic reform.
We are a party unapologetically committed to nation-building.
We are a party committed to investing in our people  -  with one long-term ambition: building the best educated, best trained, best skilled workforce in the world.
We are a party committed to helping working Australian and working families under financial pressure.
We are a party committed to helping the most vulnerable.
We are the party committed to managing change, in a world facing massive change where our continuing responsibility is to help people through the process of change.
We are therefore committed to building a strong Australian economy  -  but an economy that delivers for Australians, working families and those doing it tough.
We are committed to a secure Australia  -  strong at home and fully engaged abroad, through what I have described elsewhere as creative middle power diplomacy.
And we are committed to the greatest public good of our age  -  protecting the environment, the global commons that is the planet itself  -  for now and for future generations.
Our achievements so far
These values and priorities have guided our first six months in office.
And since we came to office, we've been delivering on the substantial reform program that we laid out before last year's election.
The first legislation the new Federal Labor Government introduced into the Commonwealth Parliament was to abolish AWAs.
We've introduced the Transition Act; we released our draft National Employment Standards, and we've begun the process of modernising industrial awards.
When we came to office, we inherited an economy facing serious long-term challenges, despite years of favourable external conditions:
     * rising inflation;
     * weak productivity growth;
     * severe supply constraints in skills and infrastructure;
     * unprepared for long-term challenges like climate change, and
     * unprepared for the rise of China and India.
Since coming to office, we have begun taking action to build a modern, competitive Australia through a sustained focus on driving strong productivity growth.
Higher productivity growth is the key to sustaining low inflation, achieving greater prosperity and securing the well-paid jobs of the future for the next generation.
That's why we've begun the education revolution, funding major new initiatives in early childhood education, computers and trades training centres in every secondary school, 630,000 new training places, thousands of new university scholarships and an upfront half billion dollar investment in our universities.
It's why we've begun taking national leadership on infrastructure  -  this week appointing the board of Infrastructure Australia, which will help guide nation-building infrastructure priorities.
It's why we're working towards establishing a National Broadband Network, to bring Australia fully into the digital economy of the 21st century.
It's why we've begun to reform the Federation  -  with a new era of Commonwealth/State relations.
...Working towards the goal of a seamless national economy, and a modern Federal system of government that delivers better services to all Australians.
The Government is now acting on climate change, after more than a decade of denial and neglect.
Within minutes of taking office, the Government signed the instruments to ratify the Kyoto Protocol.
We are now active participants in the Bali Roadmap on climate change, and we're hard at work in designing the emissions trading scheme  -  which will be one of the most important economic reforms of the next decade.
On the first day of Parliamentary business, I extended an apology to the stolen generations of Indigenous Australians.
We have begun a policy program of closing the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous life opportunities in Australia.
The Government has begun work on preserving the great Australian dream of home ownership for a new generation.
Last week's Budget delivered our new First Home Savers Account; a new National Rental Affordability Scheme, together with a new Housing Affordability Fund to help reduce infrastructure costs for new houses and new developments.
From the time I came to office I said it is unacceptable that in a nation as prosperous as Australia 100,000 people are homeless  -  including an estimated 46,000 young Australians under the age of 24.
I am determined that we tackle this problem.
This week I released the Government's first Green Paper on homelessness. We are now looking at how to invest in new solutions in partnership with community and business groups to deal with this blight on us all.
The Government has concluded an historic agreement with the State and Territory governments of Australia to establish a single national authority to manage Australia's major inland river system  -  the Murray-Darling  -  whose future is threatened by the impact of over allocation and climate change.
The Government has advanced the cause of gender equality by appointing the first woman Governor General in 107 years.
Abroad, the Government has been strengthening the three pillars of our relationship with the world: our alliance with the US, our engagement with the United Nations and our commitment to engagement with our own region.
We have begun work on restoring Australia's engagement with the international community, including announcing our candidacy for the UN Security Council for 2013-14 after a 25 year absence.
And in our region, in my first visit to Papua New Guinea and the Solomon Islands I affirmed our determination to tackle under-development across the Pacific Island states, through our new proposal for Pacific Partnerships for Development.
The 2008 Budget
Two weeks ago we brought down the Budget - a responsible Budget, that will help fight inflation and deliver for working families.
The Budget was framed amidst difficult economic conditions.
The Australian economy is facing powerful countervailing forces.
We have the highest domestic inflation in 16 years.
At the same time, turbulence in the global economy is slowing world growth.
The global economy is going through what the International Monetary Fund has described as the greatest financial shock since the Great Depression.
At the same time, oil prices have soared to record global levels off the back of ballooning demand from China and the developing world.
These were indeed difficult conditions in which to frame a Budget.
But we have delivered a responsible Budget, with a strong surplus; a Budget that honours our commitments before the election to support working Australians and working families under financial pressure; and at the same time commencing our long-term project of investing in the nation's future.
At the centre of the Budget was a $55 billion Working Families Support Package  -  and we make no apology for tipping the scales back in favour of working Australians and working families.
The Working Families Support Package helps families meet the increasing costs of living by providing tax cuts, and help with child care fees and the costs of education and housing.
We understand that families are under financial pressure because of rising costs of living such as mortgages, rents, petrol, groceries and childcare  -  unlike our predecessors who told us working families have never been better off and still tell us today that the impact of rising prices and inflation are a fairy tale and a charade.
We can't ease all the financial pressures on working families.
But we can make a difference  -  by focusing help on those who need it the most.
That's what we've done with the Budget's tax cuts.
That's what we've done with the Education Tax Refund to help families with the cost of textbooks, computers, internet connections and other school expenses.
That's what we've done with the Child Care Tax Rebate, increasing it from 30 per cent to 50 per cent.
Seniors are struggling to make ends meet with escalating prices for food, petrol and rents  -  and we've begun the process of providing a better outcome for seniors after more than a decade of neglect.
We are committed to righting the wrongful neglect of our seniors over more than a decade of Coalition rule.
That is why we invested an additional $5.2 billion for Australia's 2.2 million seniors in this Budget compared with $1.5 billion in Mr Howard's last Budget. 
That's why pensioners this year under our Budget will
receive $900 in additional benefits compared with $500 in additional benefits under Mr Howard's last Budget.
That is why we invested an additional $1.1 billion for Australia's 430,000 carers in this Budget compared with a $361 million in Mr Howard's last Budget. 
That is why we've provided recipients of both the carer's payments and the carer's allowance with an additional payment this year of $2,100  -  compared with the $1,600 provided in Mr Howard's last Budget.
And that's why for Australia's 721,000 disability support pensioners we have provided for the first time an additional $500 utilities allowance this year  -  at a cost of $1.16 billion over five years. That compares to them receiving nothing additional under Mr Howard's last Budget.
I know this doesn't solve the cost of living pressures facing seniors, carers and those on disability support pensions.
But this is a first step in the right direction.
The Budget also delivered on our long-term commitments.
     * $5.9 billion towards the Education Revolution.
     * $2.3 billion to address climate change.
     * And $3.2 billion to end the blame game over our hospitals.
The Budget is also unapologetically about nation building. That's why the Budget has established the following:
     * The $20 billion Building Australia Fund will pay for ongoing improvements in our roads, ports, railways and broadband.
     * The $11 billion Education Investment Fund will pay for ongoing improvements in our TAFEs and universities as part of the Education Revolution.
     * The $10 billion Health and Hospitals Fund will pay for better hospitals, better healthcare facilities generally, and important medical research.
These funds will help the nation prepare for the long-term challenges of the future.
We were able to deliver on our priorities because we were tough on spending.
We cut out waste and pared back the excesses of the previous Liberal Government.
Every single dollar of new spending in this Budget was more than matched by savings elsewhere.
As a share of GDP, we have reduced government spending to its lowest level since 1989. And tax as a proportion of GDP has also been reduced.
Delegates, what the Budget demonstrated  -  and what the economic debate this year has demonstrated  -  is that the Australian Labor Party is now unmistakeably the party of responsible economic management.
...The party of responsible economic management, and the party of the reforming centre of Australian politics.
Two days after Wayne Swan brought down the Budget, Dr Nelson and Mr Turnbull came out with a $22 billion raid on the Budget surplus.
Malcolm Turnbull says Brendan Nelson's budget plans are bad policy, but good politics  -  and he supports those plans, now, but he won't say if the Liberals will actually take those policies to the next election.
Malcolm Turnbull says millionaires should get government welfare.
Brendan Nelson first says millionaires shouldn't get welfare.
Then he says that they should.
Then he says he doesn't support means testing.
But despite the fact he doesn't support means testing, he's still going to vote for means testing.
And more than a week after announcing his plans to blow a hole of something like $22 billion in the Budget, the Coalition has not released even one single costing to allow the public to see their policy plans and judge their merit.
This is the modern Liberal Party:
The party of reckless spending and endless confusion.
The party of short-term politics and long-term neglect.
The party whose legacy was the highest inflation rates in 16 years.
The party that gave us ten interest rate rises in a row.
The party that four years ago told us they'd keep interest rates at record lows.
The party that said that working families have never been better off.
The party that spent a decade in denial about climate change, the greatest economic challenge of our time.
The party that let our nation's investment in tertiary education slide, while our competitors invested more and more, knowing that skills and education are critical to a strong economy in the 21st century.
And the party of Work Choices  -  the party that attacked the rights of working people and created Australian Workplace Agreements that cut their wages and conditions.
This is the party  -  the Liberal Party  -  which has trashed whatever credentials it had on responsible economic management and the party that has completely lost touch with the needs of working Australians.
Our challenges beyond the Budget
The Budget has built a long-term foundation for dealing with the nation's future challenges.
We will now build on that foundation.
Not with a focus on just the next 12 months, but in the spirit of the 2020 Summit  -  a focus on the next 12 years and beyond.
We are moving ahead on many fronts.
Infrastructure Australia is moving ahead with the national audit of our infrastructure needs.
COAG is moving ahead with a comprehensive reform agenda covering all key aspects of Commonwealth/State relations.
Treasury Secretary Ken Henry is preparing a report on how we confront the long term, interrelated challenges of our tax, welfare and retirement income systems  -  which will include a review of aged pensions, due in February 2009.
Julia Gillard is consulting widely on the details of the modern, fair and flexible industrial relations system that will commence from 1 January 2010.
Julia has also begun the long term reform of Australian higher education.
And Penny Wong is working hard on the design of the emissions trading scheme, a critically important long term economic reform.
Slashing elective surgery waiting lists: Stage Two
Since we came to office, Nicola Roxon has been working hard on our long terms plans for reform of the health and hospitals system.
We have established the National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission to develop a long term national health reform plan.
And we have started taking action.
I have already mentioned the new $10 billion Health and Hospitals Fund to ensure long term funding for hospitals, medical technology and research facilities and projects.
The Budget delivered a new investment of $3.2 billion in the National Health and Hospitals Reform Plan  -  to revitalise the public health system.
We have delivered an additional $1 billion to public hospitals over the next year  -  to begin rebuilding the health system after eleven years of neglect.
This growth is the largest single year increase in public hospital funding in almost a decade.
We have invested $275 million in GP Super Clinics, to improve access to health care and enhance chronic disease management.
We have also invested $249 million in a National Cancer Plan.
Another central part of our reforms is the Government's $600 million plan to slash elective surgery waiting lists.
In 2005-06, more than 25,000 patients waited more than one year for elective surgery.
We find this unacceptable and we have begun the job of fixing it.
Today I announce that the Federal Government will commit a further $150 million to slash elective surgery waiting lists.
This funding builds upon the Government's initial investment of $150 million for an immediate blitz on elective surgery waiting lists, announced earlier this year.
This new funding will deliver structural reform in the delivery of elective surgery, to help bring about lasting change in our hospitals.
This funding could be used to buy new, state-of-the-art surgical equipment and construct dedicated elective surgery units.
The allocation of this funding, and what it will be invested in, has now been agreed between the Commonwealth and the States and Territories:
For Victoria, this will mean $36.8 million to redevelop facilities at Royal Melbourne, Monash, Sunshine, Geelong and Frankston hospitals.
It will help in purchasing new equipment, including computer assisted surgical interventions.
It will also provide funding for three innovation projects to help improve elective surgery management.
This is modern Labor  -  reforming and investing.
Conclusion
Delegates, if we are to achieve the goals we've discussed today for the Party and for the nation, we must remain in government.
And that comes back to you, and your efforts on behalf of the great Labor cause.
Today, and over the coming weeks, we're all supporting Darren McCubbin in the Herculean task of winning Gippsland, a seat never once won by Labor in 107 years.
And beyond the by-election in Gippsland, we should all remember that we did not win the last Federal election by a large margin.
So too we would lose the next election with just a small swing against us.
And we are in uncertain economic times.
Nobody should therefore underestimate the challenges that face a reforming Labor Government.
We must deliver responsible economic management.
We must continue to provide support to working Australians, working families and those doing it tough.
We must also be a government of the future  -  a government that plans for the future, a government that invests in the future and a government that delivers the future.
And beyond all these requirements, we must govern with an iron discipline, an iron resolve and an iron focus.
With this in our arsenal, we will be a government that prevails in the tasks that have been set for us by the people who have elected us.
And that is our solemn responsibility.


Introduction
Thank you Jenny and thank you Tony for being here as well. Tom Calma, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commissioner; National Sorry Day Committee Chairs, Helen Moran and Sally Fitzpatrick; Stolen Generation Alliance Chairs, Christine King and Phil Elsegood; Gemma Black; Barbara Livesey and ladies and gentlemen. And I join Jenny in honoring the Ngunnawal people on whose land we meet.
Firstly this in an important day, because it goes back to where our process of reconciliation in many respects began. And that's the Bringing them Home report. It's very difficult to read that report and not be moved by it. The stories contained within it are terrible stories, just terrible stories. The good part of the bringing them home report was, it would enable us as a nation to begin to reflect on what had happened, to begin to reflect on how we as a nation could make amends for past wrongs. And how we as a nation then could move forward to deal with the challenges of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australia for the future.
The national apology delivered here in February was one part of what I'd see as a continuing process. It's important, it's important for the nation, the Parliament, the Government and supported by the Opposition to have advanced that motion of Apology. It is important because of the recognition, what had transpired in the past and important in terms of a simple statement of Sorry on the part of the Parliament. But important on top of that because it began our process of closing the gap between Aboriginal and Non Aboriginal Australia. And that's where the hard part begins, that's where the really hard part begins.
Some people say that the problem with the National apology is that it's all about symbols. You know something, there is something very potent about an apology if through the process of giving it we then clear a path of action ahead of us. Someone explained it to me once that it's very difficult to establish a normal relationship with somebody where there have been past wrongs. We simply don't go up and acknowledge that those wrongs have been committed. And it's only once that occurs that you can truly and effectively move forward.
So for us that was very much the first step. Of course the steps which come after that are absolutely critical, are absolutely critical. Since that time Jenny in particular has been very busy. $100 million for Indigenous maternal and child health services; $56 million over four years to improve literacy and numeracy for every Indigenous child; $100 million to employ 200 new teachers in the Northern Territory; $90 million to create 300 jobs for indigenous rangers. And we recently announced $647 million in Housing funding in partnership with the Northern Territory Government, which will deliver around 750 new houses and over 2500 upgrades over the next 5 years and beyond. All part of a $1.6 billion Indigenous housing program.
So symbols without substance, are as I said on the apology day itself, nothing more than a clanging gong. Symbols when added with substance begin to add up to something and that's the course of action upon which this Government is now embarked.
As a reminder of the Apology, we have before us of course this magnificent calligraphic manuscript on velum or calfskin. The calligraphy has been done by Gemma Black, a local Canberra woman, whose work adorns other parts of Parliament House - in particular she regularly works on the Presiding Officer and the Speaker of the House Visitor Books. While she has more than twenty years experience with commissions from both public and private sectors throughout the country, working on this project, she's described as an honour for her both personally and professionally.
This artwork has been donated to the Parliament and therefore on permanent display as part of the Parliament House collection, I thank her for that. It will reside beside the Coolamon, presented to the Government by the Stolen Generations in thanks for the apology, in a place that reflects its importance to our country. The artwork will stand as a constant reminder of where we have just come from and of the journey of healing among us all and where we intend to go to in bringing that journey towards a proper conclusion - which is closing the gap between indigenous and non indigenous Australians.
Prior to the apology the Government engaged with representatives of the two national Stolen Generations organisations to ensure that the apology reflected their aspirations. The Government has continued this engagement. I would like to applaud the growing partnership between the National Sorry Day Committee and the Stolen Generations Alliance.
The practical measures highlighted in the Bringing Them Home Report, included:
     * commemoration activities,
     * training for health professionals,
     * family reunion services,
     * language, culture and history projects,
     * parenting services,
     * prisoner and juvenile justice services,
     * ensuring national standards for care and protection of Indigenous children and
     * minimum access to family records.
A number of these measures merge with our national priorities for a modern Australia, including the national child protection framework, and giving children the best start in life through early childhood and parenting programs. The Government is committed to working with Stolen Generations to make sure their voices are heard in the design of these policies and programs, and to bring forward some concrete outcomes by this time next year.
Today the Australian Government continues its commitment to the ongoing healing of our Stolen Generations. It is so important that we build on the goodwill and opportunities that were opened up by the apology. One of the main concerns that has arisen through our engagement with the stolen generations has been the critical need for healing services to help individuals and families with their own healing.
This is important work. At the end of June, Stolen Generations members, professionals in men's health, trauma, child safety, mental health, suicide prevention, family reunion services and Government departments will come together to meet to map out the way forward, together. They will consider the evidence. This might include information about experience in other jurisdictions and other parts of Australia. And research led most recently by Doctor Fiona Stanley, the head of the Telethon Institute for Child Health Research and some of the ideas presented at the 2020 summit.
As a first step, the Department of Health and Ageing, with advice from the Stolen Generations working group, will develop a training program for mainstream health services to improve their ability to care for the Stolen Generations, their families and others who were affected. As part of improving access to services, we will develop information materials to promote options for care available to members of the Stolen Generation.
Ladies and Gentlemen, fellow Australians, this is a good day.
And it is the beginning of what I hope will be many good days into the future. Many of us have felt almost a sense of learned helplessness, about how to deal with the challenges of indigenous Australia in the past. It is as if so many things have been trialled and that so many things have not worked. I think it is equally important to look forward with optimism about the things that do work and the things that are going well.
We must be realistic about where we need to improve and lift our game. And we intend to be realistic. I said at the time of the national apology statement that we wish to embark upon a new compact with indigenous Australia which is anchored in the principle of mutual responsibility and mutual respect. And that will be very much our governing principle for the future. The challenges are huge. We need to honour the successes where they appear. And treasure them, and be positive about them. We need to be blunt and realistic about where the problems exist and work our way through them.
Always, always, measuring how we go along the way. Always, always seeking to ensure that where we end up is better, better than the place that we left from.
So I thank you one and all for being long term partners with Government's of all political persuasions in this very long journey towards reconciliation in Australia.
The National Apology is one step in that process. National Sorry Day is another part of that process. Closing the gap is the framework within which we need to work for the future.
Today on this 10th Anniversary of the first Sorry Day, it is therefore with great pleasure that I present this work to the Parliament of Australia to commemorate and celebrate this continuing journey of healing for us all.


Acknowledgements
Sepp Blatter [FIFA President] 
Frank Lowy [Chairman, Football Federation Australia] 
Distinguished delegates distinguished observers 
Citizens of the world 
Lovers of football
Welcome to Australia. Welcome to Sydney.
And welcome to this great building, the symbol of Sydney to the world.
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
And I acknowledge the people of Burma and the people of China who have in recent times experienced great tragedies
I am honoured to open the 58th Congress of FIFA this afternoon.
You are all welcome guests in our country.
With 208 member associations, an event like this Congress is a reminder that football is the most truly global support of all.
Look around this hall and you are reminded of just how football brings together people from every corner of the world.
And as I look around this hall, I am reminded of the modern face of Australia.
A nation of extraordinary ethnic and cultural diversity.
Apart from the first Australians, we are a nation of migrants.
21 million people. 1 in 4 were born overseas. In fact, our people came from virtually all of the nations represented at this forum.
From Asia, from Africa, from the Americas, from Europe and from the Middle East.
In our earliest years, people came to Australia from Britain and Ireland  -  often not of their own free choice.
But in the years since the Second World War, Australia has become one of the most multicultural nations on earth.
We also seek to be an inclusive nation including indigenous Australians to whom I delivered an apology in Parliament for the great wrongs of past as part of our healing for the future.
Migrants to Australia have brought a belief in freedom; an enthusiasm to build a new life; a determination to work hard.
And often, they have brought one other thing as well: A passion for football. 
It's something Australians are reminded of every week at the hundreds of football matches held in cities, suburbs and towns around Australia.
You need only look at our ‘A League' teams to see the diversity of modern Australia.
With a population of such richly diverse backgrounds, we could almost stage our own World Cup here at home.
One of Australia's proudest sporting moments was when we made the FIFA World Cup Finals in Germany in 2006  -  the first time in 32 years.
Moments like John Aloisi's penalty goal that took us to the World Cup become a shared national memory.
It is extraordinary to consider how much of the world's population shares such memories of football.
But football is indeed the universal language.
It is more than a game  -  it is a powerful force that can bring nations together and help shape young lives through the discipline of playing in a team.
I know that FIFA understands this, with the valuable work that is done in developing nations through the GOAL project led by the President of the Asian Football Confederation, Mohamed Bin Hammam.
I am delighted that Football Federation Australia also announced yesterday a social responsibility partnership with UNICEF Australia, focused on supporting development activity for children in the Asia Pacific region.
Such programs highlight the role that football can play in developing economies.
And as a proud member of the Asian Football Confederation, I also want to wish China, Iraq and Qatar the best for the qualifying matches coming up in the weeks ahead.
Football is a passion that is shared between the nations and people of the world.
That is one of the reasons why the Australian Government strongly supports Australia's bid to host the FIFA World Cup in 2018.
Our goal is for Australia to be a good international citizen, engaged with our region and contributing to peace and development throughout the world.
We are a people committed to the principle of good international citizenship.
We are also a nation of sports lovers, and would like to see sports play a greater role in the relations between nations and peoples. A positive force.
That's why it was a great privilege for us to host the Olympic Games in 2000.
That was an extraordinary event that created a great sense of community among Australians. And a great sense of Australia as an open, international society.
Visitors and locals mingled in front of enormous screens in public squares across the city and the nation.
Some 46,000 Australians took part as unpaid volunteers - as guides and assistants, giving the typically warm and friendly Australian welcome to visitors from all around the world.
For those 46,000 Australians, it was an experience to remember.
I'm sure they'll be telling their children and grandchildren about it for years to come.
Australians loved the opportunity to be a part of such a global celebration of sport and community.
I hope that you have a taste of the same relaxed, friendly hospitality in your time here.
Conclusion
Let me conclude by saying, I wish you the very best for this, the 58th FIFA Congress.
I hope that you are able to get away from work enough to soak up all that Sydney has to offer...
The Harbour, the Bridge, a beautiful and truly global city.
And thanks to our Italian, Greek and Turkish heritage, you can even get some decent coffee here.
We can also offer you some of the best cuisine in the world.
Australians have taken their heritage from Greece, China, Lebanon, Vietnam, Thailand, Indonesia, India and elsewhere and - combined with the freshest local ingredients  -  we've made up something new  -  modern Australian cuisine, or Australians simply call it, “mod Oz”.
I hope too that you can visit some of the other highlights of Australia  -  including my home State of Queensland.
Sydney is a wonderful city, but Australia doesn't end here.
I wish you a successful Congress, and an enjoyable time in Australia.
You are truly welcome visitors to our country, for this, the 58th FIFA Congress.


The Government's mission is to build a strong and fair Australia capable of meeting the new challenges of the 21st century.
That means planning for our long-term future.
Planning to meet our long-term domestic challenges.
It also means planning to meet our long-term international challenges.
Australia must above all enhance our regional and global economic competitiveness if we are to secure our future.
Domestically we need to lift our productivity growth.
We need to have the best-trained, best-skilled work force in the world.
We will need world-class infrastructure, including high-speed broadband.
We are committed to policies that will lift work force participation rates  -  a critical need with an ageing population.
And we are committed to continuing population growth, underpinned by a continuing migration program.
We are committed to taxation reform and business deregulation.
And underpinning all must be a commitment to responsible economic management  -  injecting every effort to maintain macro-economic stability.
But Australia faces additional regional and global challenges also crucial to our nation's future  -  climate change, questions of energy and food security, the rise of China and the rise of India.
And we need a strong system of global and regional relationships and institutions to underpin stability.
We also have to make sure that the open, rules-based system of global trade is maintained and expanded.
It is the system that has underwritten our prosperity, just as it has underwritten the prosperity of the region.
When Australia looks intrinsically to the Asia-Pacific region, we can see significant future challenges.
In the South West Pacific the challenges are great.
Many of the smaller states in the region will need to work hard  -  and we will work with them  -  on establishing the foundation for a secure and sustainable future.
Terrorism in South-East Asia will remain a continuing challenge.
And across wider Continental Asia, the rise of India and China represent great economic, environmental, energy policy and security reverberations for the future.
A core challenge for Australia is  -  how do we best prepare ourselves for the Asia Pacific century  -  to maximise the opportunities, to minimise the threats and to make our own active contribution to making this Asia-Pacific Century peaceful, prosperous and sustainable for us all.
Tonight I would like to respond to that question by talking to you about the third pillar of the Government's foreign policy  -  our policy of comprehensive engagement in the Asia-Pacific region.
Our alliance with the United States is the first pillar of our foreign policy and the strategic bedrock of our foreign and security policy.
Since forming Government, we have reaffirmed our support for the alliance, including in March in Washington when I met President Bush.
The alliance  -  the relationship between Australia and the United States  -  transcends political parties and Administrations on both sides of the Pacific.
I have also spoken about the United Nations  -  the second pillar of our foreign policy.
The Government's policy is that a strong rules-based international system is in Australia's national interest.
In March in New York I met with the UN Secretary-General
I announced after that meeting that Australia would seek a seat on the UN Security Council in 2013-2014.
If Australia wants an effective United Nations, we have to be comprehensively, not marginally, engaged.
And that means engaging with key multilateral partners around the globe that share our goals, in particular our partners in Europe  -  a principle of multilateral cooperation with our European partners I re-affirmed in meetings with the European Commission in Brussels in April.
Tonight I want to talk about the third pillar of our foreign policy, comprehensive engagement with Asia.
It is a pillar of our foreign policy because this Government is committed to strong, close, cooperative relations with the countries of Asia.
We have interests that we want to pursue in the region.
And we believe that we can also make a strong positive contribution to the region  -  to its long-term stability, prosperity and sustainability.
We want to build on our history of political, strategic, economic and development contributions to the region in the years ahead.
Tonight I'd like to talk about the future of two of our critical bilateral relations in the region  -  Japan and Indonesia.
And I'd also like to talk about the future of the regional architecture of the wider region.
The changes now taking place in the global economic and strategic terrain are of historic proportions.
Put simply, global economic and strategic weight is shifting to Asia.
For the first time in the settled history of this continent, we find ourselves in the region that will be at the centre of global affairs.
This is a process that began half a century ago  -  and it has at least that long left to run.
Japan led the way with its remarkable post-war recovery and rapid economic growth.
Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong and Singapore followed.
The countries of South East Asia  -  in spite of the 1997 financial crisis  -  have continued to show strong growth.
Then, in the 1990s China and India began to grow rapidly.
By 2020, according to one study last year, Asia will account for around 45 per cent of global GDP.
By 2020 it will account for around one-third of global trade.
By 2020, Asia's share of global military spending will have grown to nearly one quarter.
Militaries throughout Asia have sought to modernise and continued economic growth will encourage the acquisition of higher technology military systems.
And the region contains continuing potential flashpoints  -  Kashmir, the Taiwan Strait, the Korean Peninsula.
But there is more to the story of a changing Asia than the economic and strategic picture.
Demographics are changing.
The countries that developed first have ageing populations.
China's population continues to grow, but it too is ageing.
China expects its population to peak at around 1.5 billion in the 2030s.
India's population will remain young and will continue to grow in the decades ahead.
It will become the most populous nation in the world by the middle of the century.
The overall population of the region is continuing to grow  -  by 2020 it is projected to be 4.6 billion (out of a total global population of 7.7 billion).
A growing population and higher standards of living are putting increasing pressure on resources.
To drive these growing economies and to provide the standard of living these populations require, demand for energy is growing dramatically.
APEC estimates that among its member economies demand for energy will grow by around 40 per cent by 2020.
Overall, Asia's energy consumption could grow by around two-thirds by 2020.
Or, to put it another way, more than half of the increase in global energy consumption to 2020 will come from Asia.
Wealthier populations are also demanding more and better food.
We have already seen the rising cost of food, globally not just in Asia.
The rising population needs more water too.
We will see more people in water stress because much of the population growth in the years ahead will come in developing countries that already face fresh water supply pressures.
The changes and challenges for Asia will be great.
So, for Australia, engagement with Asia is not just a matter of historical recognition of the requirements of geographical proximity.
Our engagement with Asia for the future will be about engaging with a region of global significance in its own right.
It is the coincidence of several imperatives  -  geographic, economic and strategic.
It is engagement with a region that will be of crucial importance for the future of our planet.
How, then, do we best prepare for the Asia-Pacific century?
First, we have to get our national house in order to maximise our global competitiveness.
Then we need to have good economic and security relations with the countries in our region.
But there is a brittleness in a foreign policy based only on bilateral relations.
To remove some of that brittleness, we need strong and effective regional institutions.
Strong institutions that will underpin an open, peaceful, stable, prosperous and sustainable region.
We need them because regional institutions are important in addressing collective challenges that no one country can address alone  -  and they help us develop a common idea of what those challenges are.
Challenges like:
     * Enhancing a sense of security community (we have something to learn from Europe where centuries of animosity have been transformed into an unparalleled degree of transnational cooperation);
     * Developing a capacity to deal with terrorism, natural disasters and disease  -  problems that definitionally transcend national boundaries;
     * Enhancing non-discriminatory and open trading regimes across the region in support of global institutions; and
     * Providing long-term energy, resource and food security.
I believe it is time that we started to think about where we want to be with our regional architecture in 2020.
It is nearly 20 years since the first APEC meeting in Canberra.
When APEC started, we spoke about the gradual evolution of regional architecture.
And that architecture has evolved in the intervening 20 years.
We have APEC, the ASEAN Regional Forum, ASEAN Plus Three and, most recently, the East Asia Summit.
Each has its own positive role to play.
But the core question is what should the long-term vision for our region's architecture be?
We believe that we need to anticipate the historic changes in our region and seek to shape them; rather than simply reacting to them.
We need to have a vision for an Asia Pacific Community, a vision that embraces:
     * A regional institution which spans the entire Asia-Pacific region  -  including the United States, Japan, China India, Indonesia and the other states of the region.
     * A regional institution which is able to engage in the full spectrum of dialogue, cooperation and action on economic and political matters and future challenges related to security.
The purpose is to encourage the development of a genuine and comprehensive sense of community whose habitual operating principle is cooperation.
The danger in not acting is that we run the risk of succumbing to the perception that future conflict within our region may somehow be inevitable.
At present none of our existing regional mechanisms as currently configured are capable of achieving these purposes.
That is why the new Australian Government argues that we should now begin the regional debate about where we want to be in 2020.
Such a debate does not of itself mean the diminution of any of the existing regional bodies.
APEC, the ASEAN Regional Forum, the East Asia Summit, ASEAN Plus Three and ASEAN itself will continue to play important roles, and longer-term may continue in their own right or embody the building blocks of an Asia Pacific Community.
There will be wide ranging views about this across the region  -  some more supportive than others.
New bodies and new ideas will continue to emerge.
Australia would welcome the evolution of the Six Party Talks into a wider regional body to discuss confidence and security building measures in North East Asia and beyond  -  and we support the United States in this.
I would also argue that an Asia Pacific Community by 2020 is consistent with President Bush's call for the development of a Free Trade Area of the Asia Pacific  -  an ambition we have consistently supported as a long-term goal.
The European Union of course does not represent an identikit model of what we would seek to develop in the Asia Pacific.
But what we can learn from Europe is this  -  it is necessary to take the first step.
In the 1950s, sceptics saw European integration as unrealistic.
But most people would now agree that the goal of the visionaries in Europe who sat down in the 1950s and resolved to build prosperity and a common sense of a security community has been achieved.
It is that spirit we need to capture in our hemisphere.
Our special challenge is that we face a region with greater diversity in political systems and economic structures, levels of development, religious beliefs, languages and cultures, than did our counterparts in Europe.
But that should not stop us from thinking big.
The Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) is an example of the benefits of long-term vision.
In a diverse region, ASEAN has brought together a varied group and forged a common outlook on many questions.
ASEAN has built habits of cooperation and dialogue.
And ASEAN has played a critical role in building and maintaining peace in the region through its work.
To take forward the vision for an Asia Pacific Community during the next six months, the Australian Government will dispatch a high-level envoy to the capitals of the wider region to discuss this proposal.
Subject to that further dialogue we would envisage the possibility of a further high-level conference of government and non-government representatives to advance this proposal.
I fully recognise that this will not be an easy process  -  just as the establishment of APEC was not easy 20 years ago.
But the speed and the scope of changes in our region means we need to act now.
That is why I am announcing tonight the appointment of Dick Woolcott as Australia's envoy on this important matter of unfinished regional business  -  to continue and hopefully complete the work he began on Prime Minister Hawke's behalf 20 years ago.
I said before that this is the Asia Pacific Century.
Ours must be an open region  -  we need to link into the world, not shut ourselves off from it.
And Australia has to be at the forefront of that challenge, helping to provide the ideas and drive to build new regional architecture  -  something we have not done for over a decade.
We also need to invest in our relationships with our partners around the region.
In North East Asia we will need to continue to build our relationships with the economic powerhouses to which we are so closely linked  -  China, Japan and Korea.
In South East Asia we have to add even more depth to our relationships with our key partners  -  Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore and others.
In South Asia, we need to re-energise our relationship with the other rising giant, India.
But, ahead of my visit to Japan and Indonesia next week I want to explain how our Government sees its relations with these two crucial partners.
In many ways, our relationship with Japan is one of the foundations of our regional engagement.
The relationship between Australia and Japan is a comprehensive strategic, security and economic partnership  -  and beyond that we have an enduring friendship.
And I am committed to adding even more depth and breadth to that partnership.
Over the past 50 years, developments in our relationship with Japan have often led the way in our engagement with the region.
From our trade treaty in 1957, through to working together to establish APEC in the 1980s under Bob Hawke's leadership, and to our security cooperation, developments in our relationship with Japan have been at the forefront of our regional engagement.
Japan is an ancient culture.
Japan is a global economic power  -  the world's second-biggest economy.
Its economic presence has made a critical contribution to many economies around the world  -  including Australia.
It is a major provider of development assistance around the globe.
Japan is also one of the United Nation's strongest supporters.
It is a clear voice on the world stage for non-proliferation of nuclear and other weapons  -  bringing to the debate its unique and terrible history as the only country to have suffered the effects of a nuclear weapon.
Japan also represents a significant security presence in our East Asian hemisphere.
So, for Australia, engaging with Japan is a core priority.
We have an enduring economic relationship.
But we can still do more to secure a strong future economic relationship.
I will be talking with Prime Minister Fukuda about how we can accelerate our negotiations for a free trade agreement (FTA).
We are also strategic partners.
When I meet with Prime Minister Fukuda next week I hope to be able to take forward concrete proposals for strengthening our security engagement  -  both bilaterally and trilaterally with the United States.
Prime Minister Fukuda and I will also look at how Australia and Japan can cooperate more both regionally and globally.
Regionally, we can look also work more closely together on our development assistance efforts in the Pacific.
Globally, we can also work together on climate change.
Prime Minister Fukuda has invited me to attend the G8 outreach meeting in Japan in July.
Climate change will be a major focus of the outreach session and I will be talking to Prime Minister Fukuda about how we can work together on the science and the policy of climate change.
Underlying the economic relationship, the political relationship and the strategic relationship are the people to people links.
It includes students travelling in both directions  -  including those who spend time on home stay programs, learning the language and culture of the other country.
Japanese is the most studied foreign language in Australia  -  more than 220,000 Australians are studying Japanese at public high schools.
I have to acknowledge here the problem of whaling.
We have had, and continue to have, a frank dialogue with Japan on this.
But I am hopeful that we will be able to find a diplomatic solution to what is an important disagreement among friends.
Next week will be my second visit to Indonesia since becoming Prime Minister  -  my first having been to the Bali climate change meeting in December.
I am looking forward to sitting down again with President Yudhoyono and talking through the future of our relationship.
We already have a great history to build on.
Australia  -  under the ALP  -  took the initiative to represent Indonesia's interests at the United Nations in 1947.
We were a strong supporter of Indonesian independence in 1949.
And, since that time, our histories have been inseparable.
Our relationship has now matured and we have a true partnership.
I have watched Indonesia's remarkable development in recent years.
And it is worth revisiting some of the fundamentals about Indonesia.
Indonesia is the largest democracy in Asia after India.
It is the world's most populous Muslim nation.
Since the financial crisis in 1997 Indonesia has made a strong recovery.
Its economy is growing at over six per cent annually.
Its transition to democracy and its economic recovery in the past decade have been remarkable.
In Australia we should have a better understanding of these changes because our relationship with Indonesia is so important.
It is important to us because of the joint challenges we face and the need we have to develop common responses to these challenges.
For instance on climate change.
I have already had a discussion about increasing our climate change cooperation with President Yudhoyono when we met in Bali  -  and I want to acknowledge the President's leadership on this.
Exploring ways to further this cooperation will be a top priority for my visit to Indonesia next week.
I hope to be able to outline a way forward for Australia-Indonesia climate change cooperation during my visit.
In particular, I believe there is real scope for us to cooperate on the problem of deforestation.
We also have a strong base of people-to-people links.
Nearly 400,000 people travel back and forth between Australia and Indonesia each year.
And around 15,000 Indonesian students study in Australia.
I am keen to make sure that more people in Australia learn about Indonesia.
Indonesian is one of the target languages of our Government's investment of $62 million dollars over the next three years to boost Asian language study in Australian high schools  -  building on the 170,000 Australians who already study Indonesian at public high schools.
And I am keen to see Indonesians learn more about Australia too.
An important part of this mutual learning process is inter-faith dialogue.
There have been a number of rounds of this dialogue so far.
It is a good initiative and one that I hope can be broadened over time.
Our shared global interests and the good people-to-people links that we share give us a good base to further develop our bilateral relationship.
We need to have a vision of where we want to take the bilateral relationship and we need to work towards that vision.
For me, it is a vision of a partnership built on mutual respect and mutual benefit.
Developing our economic relationship is an important part of that.
We need to keep working on our free trade agreement study.
Our goal is simple  -  to make it easier for our business communities to interact with each other.
We also have to build our defence and security relationship.
We have a good basis for cooperation in the Lombok Treaty, but we need to do more.
In particular, we need to further our cooperation in the security field given our common challenge in terrorism.
Beyond our bilateral relationship Australia and Indonesia can yield better results for the region and for the world when we work together in a diplomatic partnership that goes beyond the traditional bilateral preoccupations.
For Australia, cooperation with Indonesia on regional matters  -  including the East Asia Summit  -  is of central importance.
Natural disasters in Burma and China in recent weeks  -  both with terrible death tolls  -  have reminded us of the need to for regional cooperation to have practical results, by improving coordination of disaster response efforts for instance.
Here APEC has an important role to play.
Australia and Indonesia are co-chairs of an APEC task force on emergency preparedness and response.
It was established after the Indian Ocean tsunami in 2004.
And it has already done some good work.
When I visit Indonesia next week, I will be discussing with President Yudhoyono how we can lift the tempo of the task force's work.
I have some specific proposals to take to the President about how we can do more to bring together disaster relief experts from around the region  -  because when a crisis hits, our people need to have ready made networks so we can respond in a timely fashion.
In doing so, we will need to build on important initiatives already advanced elsewhere in the region  -  most recently by Prime Minister Fukuda of Japan.
As we look to build a new regional architecture for 2020 and beyond, Indonesia will be one of our critical partners.
For Australia, Indonesia is a partner in nearly every field of endeavour.
We are committed to building a closer relationship between our people, our parliaments and our institutions.
We are partners in tackling climate change.
We are partners in building the region.
Next week in Indonesia, I look forward to talking with President Yudhoyono about how we take this partnership forward.
About 30 years ago I first set foot in the wider region.
That experience  -  and my study of Asian history, language and cultures at university  -  opened my eyes to the importance of the region for Australia.
And it has left me firmly of the view that Australia has to make itself the most Asia-literate country in the collective West.
Asia is a diverse continent and we have to put great effort into building and maintaining our engagement into the future.
Our businesses, our academic institutions and our government agencies need to understand Asia.
This Government will be investing more in this direction.
Because we in this nation have a unique requirement to fully comprehend and engage with the great new global dynamics of the Asia-Pacific century.
Australia must play its part in shaping the region's future.
And that is what the new Australian Government intends to do.


First of all, thank you all for agreeing to participate. I really appreciate that. This is a priority for the Government. Our mission as a Government is building a strong Australia, a fair Australia and one capable of meeting the challenges of the 21st century.
One of those challenges is not just a 21st century challenge, it is a 20th century challenge. In fact, it has been around for a long, long time. And it is violence against women and violence against children.
And the reason we are here today is to make a difference. And the Government is determined to do that.
Prior to the election we made a commitment to establish this National Council. Today we honour that commitment. This Council begins its work. And I thank each and every one of you for willing to stick your hand up in what is a very difficult area of public policy and a very difficult area of community work - but one where we are absolutely determined to make a difference, absolutely determined to make a difference.
Many of you have already made exceptional contributions in helping survivors of violence and I am especially proud the Council includes Rachel Kayrooz from my own electorate in Brisbane. Rachel and her young daughter Faith have overcome a harrowing ordeal of violence and Rachel is an inspiration in starting the organisation of ‘Shout! Speak Out', to raise awareness of domestic violence in healthy relationships.
So, thank you Rachel. I really appreciate it.
The nation, in my view, the nation and the community, must adopt a zero tolerance attitude to violence against women and violence against children. No ifs, no buts, no maybes. That's where we have to be as a nation, that's where we have to be as a community.
If you look at the statistics on domestic violence, it still presents us with some horrific reading.
The Bureau of Stats research from '05 indicates that six per cent of women, that is one in eighteen women, have been survivors of violence in the previous 12 months.
Six per cent of women, one in 18, survivors of violence in the previous 12 months.
The nation cannot continue to tolerate that. The nation has to make a difference. We have to get that number down. And, what we are talking about through this Council, the practical measures through which that can have a real and lasting effect.
Governments alone can't solve the problem. At the policy level, we wish to engage this Council on what is our overriding benchmark for policy decision making. What works. What makes a difference. We are not interested in that which sounds good. We are not interested in that which looks good. We are interested in that which actually works and gets these figures down. That's what we're interested in.
And that is why it is really important that you have come together as a Council - as survivors, those who have supported survivors, those who represent the interests of survivors, those who can change community attitudes in our schools and our sporting clubs, in local communities and through the national media, and policy makers and advocates.
The Government's approach to tackling violence against women is also part of a broader framework of social inclusion. And very simply it is this. If you have a social inclusion agenda to build healthy communities, if it works effectively, and you have maximal participation in the nation's social and economic opportunities, it usually generates a healthier web of relationships, it usually generates a healthier web of relationships
That's why the Government is committed to building social inclusion across its policies in Government, in education, in income support, in healthcare and in community services.
Violence is not just limited to disadvantaged groups, it occurs across all income groups and cultural groups. And that is why in opposition I committed ourselves to a National Plan to reduce violence against women and children. And your work in this Council is going to be very important in putting that together.
Four specific things that we are working on already.
One, the Respectful Relationships campaign across our schools, across our secondary schools. An education campaign particularly targeted at boys. Important to build that in the minds of young boys as they become adults.
Second, White Ribbon Day. Providing $1 million to boost White Ribbon Day education activities in rural and regional communities.
Third, working with perpetrators, conducting research into international best practice models for working with perpetrators of violence.
Fourth, reviewing the actual legislation itself with States and Territories to ensure tougher and more nationally consistent laws, and best practice, in relation to reducing violence against women and kids.
And fifth, homicide monitoring. Providing half a million dollars to boost the Australian Institute of Criminology's National Homicide Monitoring Program to investigate domestic violence related homicides to inform future interventions.
These are important practical areas of work, but this is where our work simply begins.
The function of this Council is to add to that work and to add to it in areas of evidence based policy, which take us in the direction of bringing those appalling figures down. That's what we want to do.
Of course, the other element which is relevant to violence against women, violence against children, is this - homelessness. Tanya and I share a great passion in this area, what do we do about homelessness.
Recently there was a national conference of those involved in this sector in Adelaide, and Heather Nancarrow was present there and thank you for your work Heather in helping the Government put together its Green Paper on homelessness. That will move towards a White Paper by years' end. But plainly, domestic and family violence is the single greatest reason why people seek help from our homelessness services.
So these things are related. It's not just changing the attitudinal behaviour on the part of men. That is core business, and that is where so much of these activities are directed. It is also about dealing with the immediate emergency services which assist women in these circumstances, and children, and one of those core areas of services is in fact services for the homeless.
That's why for us this is doubly important, getting homelessness right.
The fact that today, in 2008, we can have 100,000 Australians as classified in the census data as homeless, is in my view, obscene. That should not be the case in a country as wealthy as ours.
So these areas of policy are interconnected.
We've got to work on prevention, and that's where so much of the action lies.
We've got to work on response, and that is helping women and children in these circumstances, including in the critical area of homelessness.
But I conclude where I began.
It is only possible if you've got effective buy in from the community represented by persons such as yourselves.
Not only do you bring extra expertise to the table, because in Government our expertise is always limited, you also bring to the table acknowledge and familiarity about what happens on the ground. What works at the point of where the rubber hits the road, where it actually is being implemented out there in the homeless shelter, in the domestic violence shelter or at the point of delivery of critical health and care services for women and children in these circumstances.
So, thank you for coming, thank you for being here. We can guarantee you, consistent with the tradition of this Government, to work very hard.
But you know something, it's actually for a good purpose. The purpose is really good public policy. It rests in some very decent Australian values. Values of fairness. And if we can't provide fairness to women and children who are under the threat of violence, then, frankly we need to be trying a lot harder.
So thanks for being on board.


I arrived in Japan last night, and I have already been able to visit two great cities.
Both steeped in historical memory.
Both sharp in their message for the future.
First Hiroshima where I visited the memorial.
It is a very moving memorial.
A memorial that reminds all humanity that each generation must commit itself afresh to the cause of peace because the cost of war is beyond any new generation's imagining.
And now Kyoto, a city that embodies much of the rich history of this great culture that is Japan.
There is a famous poem about the beauty of Kyoto.
The great poet Basho wrote:
Even in Kyoto
hearing the cuckoo's cry
I long for Kyoto
And the beauty of this great city is in part about the change of seasons  -  the snows of winter, the cherry blossoms of spring, the heat of summer, and the colours of the autumn leaves.
And the change of seasons brings our minds to another great challenge for the future  -  the great challenge of climate change.
And it is with this great cause that Kyoto is indelibly associated in the minds of the world.
Today I too want to look to the future.
The new century and the new millennium have well and truly begun.
In fact the first decade of the new century is nearly over.
It is time for us to begin thinking about what will become the Asia-Pacific century.
Will it be a truly pacific century and therefore a peaceful century?
Will we continue to build prosperity for all our peoples?
Will we continue to enlarge the democratic project?
Will ours be a sustainable region  -  contributing to or detracting from a sustainable world?
We need to be thinking planning and shaping a region that embraces these aspirations.
Rather than simply allowing other dynamics to instead shape us.
As we think about our common future in the region and the world, Australia looks to Japan as a true friend and partner.
Our relationship is strong and our friendship is enduring.
It is based on a solid foundation of economic cooperation, reaching back to our commerce treaty of 1957.
We share common values.
We are both great democracies.
We are both strong allies of the United States and have benefited from the strategic stability that the United States has brought to this hemisphere over the past half century.
We both also benefit from an open global trading system as we both are great trading nations  -  with each other, and with the world.
Australia and Japan are also deeply engaged with global developments.
We support the United Nations, including its peacekeeping operations.
We provide development assistance around the world  -  and we work together when disasters hit.
We are recognised, I believe, as good global citizens.
And both Australia and Japan are committed to the development of regional architecture, institutions and practices in our own Asia-Pacific region aimed at promoting peace, security, prosperity, development and sustainability.
Australia therefore sees our relationship with Japan as a comprehensive strategic, security and economic partnership.
A partnership energised by common interests but also by common values and an enduring friendship.
Today I would like to talk about the challenges that we face for the future and how Australia and Japan can work together to meet them.
Challenges like nuclear weapons, climate change, food and energy security and the future institutional architecture of our region.
In the past decade, the world has not paid adequate attention to nuclear weapons.
There have been nuclear developments that we have had to confront  -  like North Korea's nuclear program and the danger it poses to the region; as well as Iran's continued nuclear ambitions.
And there has been some thinking about new ways to counter the threat of weapons proliferation.
Australia and Japan were both founding partners in the Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI).
And Australia and Japan cooperate closely on export controls in the Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG).
These help to support the cornerstone of the global effort to eliminate nuclear weapons  -  in particular the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT).
But there has not been the same focus on the danger of nuclear weapons that we saw at the height of the Cold War.
In some ways that is understandable  -  nuclear weapon stockpiles have come down a long way since their peaks in the 1980s.
The two main nuclear powers, our shared ally the United States and Russia, have negotiated a series of treaties that have cut the number of nuclear weapons.
And South Africa and Ukraine have shown that it is possible for countries that have nuclear weapons to eliminate them.
We no longer live with the daily fear of nuclear war between two superpowers.
But nuclear weapons remain.
New states continue to seek to acquire them.
Some states including in our own region are expanding their existing capacity.
Hiroshima reminds us of the terrible power of these weapons.
Hiroshima should remind us that we must be vigilant afresh to stop their continued proliferation.
And we must be committed to the ultimate objective of a nuclear weapons free world.
The cornerstone of the global nuclear disarmament efforts remains the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT).
It is a treaty that is grounded in the reality of the existence of nuclear weapons, but with a firm goal of their eventual elimination.
It is a treaty that, by any historical measure, has helped arrest the spread of nuclear weapons  -  particularly given the proliferation pressures that existed across states in the 1960s when the treaty was negotiated.
But 40 years later the treaty is under great pressure.
Some states have developed nuclear weapons outside the treaty's framework.
Some, like North Korea, have defied the international community and have stated that they have left the treaty altogether.
Others like Iran defy the content of the treaty by continuing to defy the IAEA  -  the agency assigned to give the treaty force.
There are two courses of action available to the community of nations: to allow the NPT to continue to fragment; or to exert every global effort to restore and defend the treaty.
Australia stands unambiguously for the treaty.
I accept fully that we have a difficult task ahead of us.
But I believe Japan and Australia working together can make a difference in the global debate on proliferation.
We are uniquely qualified.
Japan remains the only state to have experienced the consequences of nuclear weapons.
Japan today has a large nuclear power industry.
Australia has the largest known uranium reserves in the world.
We can, therefore, understand the concerns that countries bring to this debate.
And we share a view of the importance of the NPT.
Australia and Japan are also both recognised as being committed to non-proliferation, including through our strong support for the International Atomic Energy Agency.
Each year, for more than a decade, Japan has put forward a UN resolution on nuclear disarmament.
Each year, Australia is proud to be a co-sponsor of that resolution.
We do more than just vote for it.
Alongside Japan we present it to the international community and jointly seek their support.
Australia itself for the last quarter century has developed strong global credentials in arms control and disarmament  -  through our establishment of the Australia Group; our work in the United Nations on the Chemical Weapons Convention and as one of its original signatories; and our work on the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty.
Australia and Japan have also both been at the forefront of global thinking on the long-term challenge of nuclear weapons.
In the 1990s, Australia convened the Canberra Commission on the Elimination of Nuclear Weapons.
Japan in the late 1990s established the Tokyo Forum for Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament.
These two bodies produced reports that have become benchmarks in the international community's efforts to deal with nuclear weapons.
I think it is time we looked anew at the questions they addressed and revisited some of the conclusions they reached.
The NPT Review Conference will be held in 2010.
It is the five yearly meeting of parties to the treaty to assess progress against the treaty's aims and look at how we can strengthen its provisions.
As former US Secretary of State Henry Kissinger said in 2007, nuclear non-proliferation is the most important issue facing the world today.
So, before we get to the Review Conference, we need to do some serious thinking about how we support the treaty and how we move forward on our goals.
I announce today that Australia proposes to establish an International Commission on Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament, to be co-chaired by former Australian foreign minister Gareth Evans.
The Commission will re-examine the Canberra Commission and the Tokyo Forum reports to see how far we have come, how much work remains, and develop a possible plan of action for the future.
The Commission will report to a major international conference of experts in late 2009 that will be sponsored by Australia.
I look forward to discussing with Japan their participation in the work of this commission.
Australia and Japan have also agreed to establish a high-level dialogue on non-proliferation and disarmament to advance this critical international debate.
It is intended that the Commission and the subsequent conference will help pave the way for the NPT Review Conference in 2010.
We cannot simply stand idly by and allow another Review Conference to achieve no progress  -  or worse to begin to disintegrate.
The treaty is too important.
The goal of nuclear non-proliferation is too important.
Even with these additional efforts, there is no guarantee of success.
But that should not deter us from exerting every diplomatic effort.
This is a view shared by people with unique experience in strategic policy.
In the United States, former Secretaries of State George Shultz and Henry Kissinger, former Defence Secretary William Perry, and former Chairman of the US Senate Armed Services Committee Sam Nunn said in an important article the Wall Street Journal in January:
“The accelerating spread of nuclear weapons, nuclear know-how and nuclear material has brought us to a nuclear tipping point. ... The steps we are taking now to address these threats are not adequate to the danger.”
Relevant to our deliberations here, this eminent group of Americans has suggested steps for the future.
They have said we should:
     * strengthen the means of monitoring compliance with the NPT  -  which could be achieved through requiring all NPT signatories to adopt monitoring provisions designed by the IAEA;
     * develop an international system to manage the nuclear fuel cycle  -  given the growing interest in nuclear energy; and
     * adopt a process to bring the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty into force.
It is time for a new approach  -  of which the revitalisation of the NPT and the IAEA is a critical part.
Another major challenge the international community faces is climate change.
When the international community met here in Kyoto a decade ago in December 1997, a consensus was forged on the need for the world to act on climate change.
The Kyoto Protocol was adopted.
And the first act of my Government was to sign the documents to ratify the Kyoto Protocol.
Climate change is the greatest moral, economic and social challenge of our time.
We have developed and grown over the past century in a high-carbon environment.
We now have to shift gear.
We have to move to a lower carbon economy.
And we have to do so at the lowest cost.
Australia and Japan can help lead the way in this project.
And I am pleased that I will be able to visit Japan again in four weeks time at Prime Minister Fukuda's kind invitation to attend the G8 Outreach Summit on climate change and the Major Economies Meeting Leaders Summit.
I would also like to place on record my praise for Japan's and Prime Minister Fukuda's global leadership on climate change in the lead up to the G8 meeting.
What we need is effective national and international action to meet the challenge of climate change.
Australia's climate change policy rests on the following principles:
     * acting on mitigation
     * acting on adaptation; and
     * acting globally through international negotiations.
And we take the view that our policy approaches must be informed by a clear understanding of the science of climate change.
While the science is clear on human-induced global warming, we must continue to deepen our understanding.
We have an increasingly sophisticated understanding of highly complex climate systems  -  the relationships between oceanic and atmospheric systems  -  and how the increase in our carbon emissions is affecting them.
Australia and Japan have a long history of working together on climate change.
In fact, it is the focus of our Antarctic research cooperation.
Because the Antarctic and the Southern Ocean play a major role in the global climate system.
Later this week in Tokyo, our Antarctic scientists will get together to further strengthen our cooperation in Antarctic climate science.
This work is a critical part of the puzzle to help us understand the pace, shape and trajectory of climate change.
Their work provides the evidence in support of the call for more action on climate change, not less  -  and I look forward to taking forward our cooperation with Japan on Antarctic research when I meet Prime Minister Fukuda later in the week.
In part because of this science, it is now clear that we have to act sooner rather than later if we want to avoid the most serious impacts of climate change and lower the costs to the global economy.
The economic cost of inaction on climate change is far greater than the economic cost of action.
The first pillar of Australia's response to climate change is that we need policies to reduce carbon emissions  -  the mitigation challenge.
We need to tackle this problem on a range of fronts  -  clean coal technologies, alternative fuels, renewable energy, and energy efficiency as well as combating deforestation.
Once again, Australia and Japan can cooperate closely here.
Japan relies on coal for over a quarter of its energy generation needs.
And Australia is the main source of this coal.
So we have a shared interest in solving the problem of greenhouse gas emissions from coal.
We have a shared interest in clean coal technology.
Australia and Japan are both investing in many new clean coal technologies.
We both support the Callide A project, the world's first demonstration of oxy-fuel combustion with carbon dioxide storage.
Australia is also investing in China in a pilot project to assess post-combustion carbon capture technology.
As the biggest single global source of carbon emissions, we need to invest in these new clean coal technologies.
To deal with climate change effectively, we must deal with clean coal.
It is core business for Australia, for Japan and for the world.
And again, I look forward to discussing this with Prime Minister Fukuda.
Nonetheless, driving clean coal technology alone will not solve the challenge of reducing carbon emissions.
A further area of Australia-Japan cooperation on climate change is deforestation.
Each year, the world loses about 13 million hectares of forest.
This accounts for approximately 20 percent of global human-induced greenhouse gas emissions.
Australia has outlined its commitment to reducing emissions from deforestation through our International Forest Carbon Initiative.
One of the key aims of this Initiative is to develop market-based approaches to reducing emissions from deforestation.
The ability to measure the amount of carbon stored in rainforests is the first key step in enabling countries to earn credits in the market for preventing deforestation.
Through this Initiative we are working with our neighbours, particularly Indonesia and Papua New Guinea, and these two countries represent two of the world's great remaining rainforest areas.
In March of this year I visited Papua New Guinea and signed a forest carbon partnership.
I will be discussing a similar initiative with President Yudhoyono later this week.
Through our work with Papua New Guinea and Indonesia, we can support these countries move towards participating in global forest carbon markets and gain economic benefit for the emissions that are avoided.
There is scope for Australia and Japan to work together here too.
We both have the high-technology systems to measure and monitor the carbon stored in forests  -  it requires a combination of satellite monitoring and on-the-ground observations.
Australia's National Carbon Accounting System (NCAS) is widely recognised as one of the most sophisticated systems developed so far.
I hope to agree in my talks in Tokyo that Australia and Japan will be able to offer our expertise to countries in our region to monitor their forests to support market-based initiatives to reduce deforestation; to promote sustainable livelihoods while making a significant contribution to protecting biodiversity.
A second pillar to Australia's policy is working on adaptation to the effects of climate change.
Australia is supporting countries to develop their capacity to respond to changed climatic conditions.
We have allocated $150 million to help the Pacific island states meet the challenge of adaptation.
And in March, Australia released the Port Moresby Declaration, which outlined our vision for a stronger closer relationship with the countries of the Pacific.
Sitting on top of all of these efforts is the need for an effective international climate change regime  -  a third pillar of our action program on climate change.
The international community has to act together.
We have to deliver on the roadmap agreed to at the Bali Conference.
There are irreversible consequences if we fail.
We must be ambitious.
Japan was ambitious in delivering the Kyoto Protocol.
We all need to be ambitious for the post-2012 climate regime.
We need to aim for a global regime that will deliver real action on climate change  -  based on credible actions by developed and developing countries.
Japan has been playing a critical role in the lead up to the G8 and Major Economies Meeting Leaders' Summit.
I will work with Prime Minister Fukuda to support an outcome that adds real momentum to the global climate debate.
I believe that we need a globally-agreed long-term global emissions reduction goal as a key step for framing the international response.
I welcome Japan's contribution to that debate.
We also need developing countries to take action to slow the growth of their emissions, at the same time as they continue their economic and social development, thereby placing a huge premium on energy efficiency.
We want to see an effective future global framework that reflects actions by all key countries, in binding international commitments which are consistent with our global agreement to common but differentiated responsibilities.
We fully expect that the nature and scale of commitments will differ but all nations of the world need to play their part, and make nationally-appropriate binding commitments to do this.
I look forward to working in close partnership with Japan in the 18 months that lie ahead of us culminating in the Copenhagen Conference  -  the next chapter in the mission that began here in Kyoto.
Climate change is also relevant to another of the great global challenges of the future  -  energy and food security.
Japan has been a global leader of these debates.
Energy security is particularly important given the global repricing of energy resources that is taking place.
We are currently experiencing the biggest increase in the price of crude oil since the oil shocks of the 1970s.
Global oil is at its highest price in history.
Global oil has increased in price by 400 per cent in the five years since the Iraq War.
This has profound consequences for global inflation  -  both for energy and for food.
There is an imbalance between supply and demand that is putting upwards pressure on oil prices.
So we need to deal with both sides of the equation.
Acting on their own, few governments can affect world energy prices.
But acting together there is much that can be achieved.
That is why our response to the rising costs of energy must include participation in a co-ordinated global response.
The international community must address the global imbalance between supply and demand.
OPEC needs to be pressured to increase supply in order to achieve proper market outcomes.
And disappointing supply growth from non-OPEC countries should also be addressed.
We also need greater openness to investment in the energy sector around the globe because many oil producing technologies are old, inefficient and inflexible.
Greater investment and newer technologies will help expand exploration and get oil out of the ground more efficiently.
At the same time, we need to take action to reduce global demand.
The remarkable and welcome economic development in China and India has, of course, contributed to greater energy demand.
Economic development leads to greater demand for energy.
For instance, the number of vehicles in use around the world is forecast to grow from 500 million to over one billion by 2020.
What this means is that in order to reduce demand, we need to address energy efficiency and greater transport fuel efficiency.
In the case of oil, the economic and the environmental imperatives are pointing in the same direction  -  demand reduction, in part through increased energy efficiency.
When the G8 meets in Japan next month, Australia argues that energy security, OPEC production and global energy efficiency be at the top of the agenda.
Escalating energy prices in turn have an impact on food production.
Australia's Foreign Minister attended the Food and Agriculture High-level Conference in Rome last week.
He reiterated our support for the decision by United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon to establish a Task Force on the Global Food Crisis.
In Australia, we are developing a comprehensive long-term action plan for food security which will draw on our expertise in semi-arid agriculture research, production and adaptation.
Australia has committed nearly $100 million to the United Nations World Food Programme for 2007-08.
I want to acknowledge that the Government of Japan, too, has been very generous in of its financial support for international emergency food aid.
Acting on the causes and effects of the global energy and food crisis will be critical challenges for the decades ahead.
How Japan and Australia meet these global challenges will depend in part on the future of our own region which is home to many of the world's major emerging economies.
Australia and Japan both live in the fastest growing and fastest changing region in the world.
By 2020 Asia will account for 45 per cent of global GDP, one-third of global trade and more than half of the increase in global energy consumption.
As global economic and strategic weight shifts to Asia we need to anticipate the consequences and shape the region's future.
We need to think about how to take the region's architecture to the next level.
Strong institutions are needed to underpin an open, stable and sustainable region.
We currently have a number of institutions  -  APEC, the ten-member ASEAN group, ASEAN plus three, the ASEAN Regional Forum, and the East Asia Summit.
Each has its own positive role to play.
But none of these mechanisms as currently configured is capable of providing the comprehensive framework for what the region needs to effectively shape the future.
The region needs an organisation which enables regional political, economic and security dialogue and cooperation and, where agreed, common action.
That is why I have proposed that we begin to discuss an Asia Pacific Community.
Not an identical model to Europe.
Not an economic union, monetary union, exclusive customs union  -  even less a common security pact.
Our circumstances are vastly different to Europe.
But the purpose is to encourage the development of a genuine and comprehensive sense of community whose habitual operating principle is cooperation  -  and so actively work against any latent assumptions that future conflict in our region might one day be inevitable.
It will take a lot of work to build an Asia Pacific Community  -  but we should remember 20 years ago Australia and Japan helped fashion APEC from nothing.
Twenty years later the challenge is to take APEC to the next stage in its evolution and fashion for the first time a comprehensive Asia Pacific Community.
In this context I noted carefully Prime Minister Fukuda's important speech last month about a future Asia that “acts together”.
To ensure a peaceful Asia Pacific Century, we will all need to act together.
None of us know precisely what our region or the world will look like in 2020 or in 2050.
But I know that decisions we make now will shape that world.
That is why the Australian Government is committed to working with close friends and partners like Japan on the challenges we face.
In particular on critical challenges like nuclear weapons, climate change, energy and food security, and the future shape of our region itself.
Over 50 years ago Australia and Japan took the first formal steps to establish an enduring friendship and relationship.
We are now true partners.
I want our two nations to capitalise on that foundation.
To broaden and deepen our bilateral political, security and economic relationship.
And to broaden and deepen our multilateral cooperation in tackling the great challenges of our region and our world in the century of the Asia Pacific that lies ahead.
Let us  -  Japan and Australia  -  shape that future together.


Thank you for that kind introduction.
I want to thank the Japan-Australian business Cooperation Committee for hosting this dinner tonight.
I also want to thank the Japan Chamber of Commerce and Industry, the Nippon Keidanren and the Japan Foreign Trade Council for extending their support to tonight's function.
It is an honour to have the chance to speak to the representatives of the major businesses that help tie together our two countries.
And can I also say a special thanks to Chairman Imai.
It was over forty years ago that you made your first visit to Australia on a fact finding mission with what was then the Fuji Steel Corporation.
Two years later, in 1963, Fuji Steel signed a contract with Western Mining for the supply of iron ore.
Those first shipments of iron ore were small by today's standard but that was the beginning of a relationship between Nippon Steel and the Australian resources sector that has served both Australia's economy and Japanese industry so well.
It is no exaggeration to call you a pioneer.
Your strong leadership of Nippon Steel has ensured that it today remains Japan's largest buyer of Australian steel-making materials.
And you have contributed to the Australia-Japan relationship more broadly through your role as Chair of the Japan-Australia Business Cooperation Committee since 1997.
In this role, your advocacy of an Australia-Japan FTA has been critical in building the necessary will in Japan to proceed with these negotiations.
I wish to thank you most sincerely for your contribution to the relationship, both through your leadership of Nippon Steel and the JABCC.
I am pleased that Australia was able to honour this contribution by making you an (Honorary) Companion of the Order of Australia in 2003.
Australia has many good friends in Japan  -  but you are one of our closest friends.
Ladies and gentlemen, it is a great pleasure to be back in Tokyo.
I arrived in Japan on Monday and I have been working my way here  -  riding the shinkansen and seeing some of Japan's stunning sights on the way.
Because this is my first visit to Japan as Prime Minister, I want to spend a few minutes introducing the new Australian Government and outlining our domestic agenda before I move on the main topic for today, the friendship and partnership between Australia and Japan.
The new Australian Government is committed to renewing the Australian economic reform project.
Our vision is to make sure that Australia remains competitive in the global economy.
We are already expecting the economy to grow 2.75 per cent over the next year  -  it will be our 17th consecutive year of growth.
But we are committed to strengthening our economic base.
We are committed to building a modern, Australia capable of meeting the challenges of the 21st century - to secure the nation's future.
The comprehensive long-term economic agenda of the new Government has two critical elements.
We are committed to disciplined macroeconomic management to ensure that the economy has a stable foundation.
And we are committed to activist microeconomic policies to boost Australia's lagging productivity performance by investing in human and physical capital.
We are committed to creating incentives that encourage work and enterprise.
We are determined to reform the tax system, boost workforce participation and tackle welfare to work barriers.
The Government's first budget delivered last month was the first step in our program to transform the competitiveness of the Australian economy.
Our overarching priority was responsible macroeconomic management.
And for the longer term, the budget set down plans to deal with the chronic investment deficits in the capacity side of the economy  -  in skills and infrastructure.
Budget surpluses are essential for economic stability.
But you don't change the structure of the economy with budget surpluses per se.
Real fundamental change to the underlying structure of the economy requires deep and pervasive microeconomic reform.
Productivity growth is not something you achieve with a single broad sweeping policy.
It is the aggregation of efficiency gains industry by industry, market by market, sector by sector.
We put in place a microeconomic reform agenda to lift Australia's productivity performance.
This means:
     * having the best possible regulatory environment;
     * developing an environment that supports risk taking and innovation;
     * investing in human and physical capital; and
     * investing in Australia's future and addressing our nation's long-term infrastructure bottlenecks.
We know this is a big task but we are committed to it.
For instance, we have unveiled substantial initiatives in education, including:
     * providing high-speed broadband to schools; and
     * developing a new national curriculum in maths, science, English and history.
Australia must make these investments to lift our competitiveness.
Another key part of our economic strategy is engaging with global economy.
We recognise that we can get the best for the people of Australia if we participate actively in the global economy.
And we need to engage politically and strategically with our friends and partners around the region and the world.
The new Australian Government has three pillars to our international engagement:
     * our alliance with the United States;
     * our membership of the United Nations; and
     * comprehensive engagement with the Asia-Pacific region.
For Australia, Japan is a partner in these three pillars.
Ours is a relationship that really began in earnest in 1957 with the Commerce Treaty.
In fact, 1957 was the year I was born so I identify very personally with that treaty.
Throughout the next decades, our relationship developed and broadened very quickly.
Through the Nara Treaty in 1976 and to the formalisation of our security ties in the Joint Declaration last year.
The relationship between Australia and Japan is one of comprehensive strategic, security and economic partners.
It is a relationship of enduring friendship.
We are true friends and true partners.
And it is a relationship that the Australian Government is committed to developing.
That is why in the past six months, six of my ministers have visited Japan (for a total of eight visits).
The portfolios they represent demonstrate the depth of our relationship  -  foreign affairs; trade; industry and innovation; resources, energy and tourism; climate change; and agriculture.
The ministers have visited to make sure that the momentum in all areas of our relationship is maintained.
Because even with a solid base, relationships have to be worked on  -  and our relationship does have a very solid base.
We are both democracies.
We are both US allies.
And we have an economic relationship that it is of vital importance to both our countries.
Japan continues to be Australia's largest export market  -  a position it has occupied for over 40 years.
And Japan is a major investor and employer in Australia.
We both gain a lot from this economic relationship.
We are both supporters and drivers of globalisation.
Because of these shared characteristics, we have many shared interests  -  interests that are regional and global.
Australia and Japan both want to see a stable, prosperous and open region.
We have the history of working together to establish APEC  -  and I hope to work closely with Japan as we move towards the next stage of our region's architecture.
We are also partners in the big global questions that we face  -  questions like climate change and nuclear disarmament.
The places I have visited so far in Japan show the breadth and depth of our relationship.
I have visited Hiroshima and Kyoto and had the chance to give a lecture at Kyoto University on the two great global challenges symbolised by those two cities  -  nuclear disarmament and climate change.
I visited Nagoya on Tuesday and met with the President of Toyota.
Yesterday I also visited a Jusco supermarket where President Okada of AEON Stores announced a major new campaign to promote produce from Australia.
I also had the honour of an audience with the Emperor and Empress this morning.
And I am looking forward to talking with Prime Minister Fukuda tomorrow about how we can further develop the friendship and partnership between our two countries.
I am looking forward to working with the Prime Minister on taking our relationship to a new level.
When you look at the ties between our countries, you have to acknowledge the importance of the economic relationship.
And one of the foundations of our economic relationship is, of course, the resources trade.
Last year, not long after he became Prime Minister  -  and before I became Prime Minister in Australia  -  Mr Fukuda gave a speech at a joint meeting of the Australia-Japan and Japan-Australia business cooperation committees.
He noted then the importance of the resources trade saying that Japan depends on Australia for over half of its imports of coal and iron-ore.
It is a fact that symbolises the depth of our relationship  -  a trading relationship that started decades ago because of pioneers like Mr Imai and has brought great benefits to both sides.
By sourcing materials from Australia, Japanese companies helped drive the development of the resources sector in Australia.
By being a reliable supplier for Japanese companies, Australia helped underwrite the development of key industry sectors in Japan.
And in the 21st century, that resources relationship is as strong as ever.
We both continue to gain a lot from the relationship  -  Australia has a long-term market, Japan has a stable supply source.
Australia understands the importance to Japan of the question of security of supply.
The Australian Government is committed to supporting the development of long-term commercial relationships between our two countries.
I think it is important that we also continue to look to the future in the resources trade.
Japanese investors continue to play an important role in providing capital and long-term purchasing contracts to help the development of Australia resource projects.
I want to say that the Australian Government is committed to encouraging foreign investment in Australia.
Foreign investment has always played an important role in development in Australia  -  we recognise that and expect it to continue.
We welcome foreign investment.
We particularly welcome investment in new sectors, including the renewable energy sector.
Like the 30 billion yen that Mitsui is putting into a wind farm in Victoria  -  helping us address the challenges of climate change.
You can find Japanese investment in many areas in Australia  -  not just resources.
Yesterday I had the pleasure of visiting Nagoya and meeting the President of Toyota Motor Corporation, Mr Watanabe.
Toyota is a major investor in Australia.
It employs around 4000 people and last year exported over 80,000 vehicles from Australia.
And yesterday we announced that Toyota will begin producing hybrid cars in Australia from 2010.
Toyota is a great example of the economic relationship between Australia and Japan  -  we already have deep connections, but we have to be looking for ways to take it forward.
Toyota's investment in Victoria is a vote of confidence in the Australian economy  -  and it is a symbol of the type of investment we want to attract and the sort of sectors we want to see develop  -  new, high-tech investment.
Japan's manufacturing investments in Australia go far beyond the automotive sector, as important as that is.
Japanese companies have major investments in the processed foods sector in Australia.
Snowbrand produces high quality cheese and infant formula for export to Japan and other countries,
Japan's Kirin now owns Australian National Foods, Australia's largest dairy producer.
Kirin also produces malt for brewing beer at a large facility in Perth  -  most of this comes back to Japan as a key ingredient in what I understand is a rather popular amber coloured beverage in Japan.
And then there is Hakubaku Australia, which produces dried noodles in a factory in Ballarat in country Victoria.
Why am I highlighting Japanese investment?
Because these investments highlight the growing sophistication of our bilateral economic relationship.
And it is these complex interactions that we need to bear in mind as we negotiate our bilateral FTA.
The FTA will benefit Japanese companies whether as importers of raw ingredients, or as processors of food in Australia which is ultimately for consumption in Japan.
There are many opportunities for mutually beneficial cooperation.
Yesterday, the first thing I did when I came to Tokyo was visit the AEON supermarket in Shinagawa.
President Okada showed me around and announced that his Jusco range of stores would be undertaking an Australia Fair in July.
The Fair will highlight the range of Australian produce available in the Jusco stores  -  from fruit and vegetables to great quality Australian beef.
It is an example of the depth of our economic relationship.
It shows the investment and trade links and the benefits that flow in the end to Japanese consumers.
That is why, for Australia, it is important that we deal with agriculture in our free trade agreement.
For us, it is a key exporting sector.
And we believe that Australia, with its record as a stable supplier and a friend of Japan, is well-placed to expand its role as a supplier of food to Japan.
Australia is pleased to play a role in supplying Japan's food needs through exports.
Our products make up some 10 per cent of Japan's agriculture imports.
Like in manufactures and processed food, investment plays a key role in our agricultural relationship.
I was very interested to see that AEON operates a large feedlot and cattle finishing centre in Tasmania, and that the “Aussie Beef” brand is so popular with Japanese consumers.
And production from Japanese and Australian-owned facilities produces key inputs for Japanese agriculture  -  such as stockfeed, agricultural chemicals and fertilisers.
These investment and trade links have provided enormous benefits to Japanese consumers.
And addressing current restrictions on this trade through an FTA would provide still further benefits to consumers.
An FTA could also make a significant contribution to Japan's food security.
It could help secure for Japan supplies of high-quality, safe foods at a time when global prices are rising and predicted to keep rising, and for the first time in many years, Japanese consumers have seen certain food products in short supply.
An FTA could help strengthen Australian food supplies to Japan, and encourage Japan's own agriculture sector to become more competitive.
Australia has a strong record as a stable and safe supplier and a friend of Japan, and is well-placed to continue playing this role into the future.
So far I have spoken about what are really the traditional areas of our economic relationship  -  resources, agriculture and cars.
These are all important elements of the relationship, and make up the bulk of the trade.
But I think we should also look at the future of other sectors.
Sectors like clean green technology, bio-technology, food technology, education exports and financial services.
Australia has real skills in these areas and they provide a base for greater cooperation between us.
Tourism has long been an important part of our relationship.
My home state of Queensland was at the forefront of helping to develop the Australia-Japan tourism relationship.
In the past ten years nearly six million Japanese have visited Australia.
But even with tourism taken into account, our services trade accounts for only around eight per cent of our exports to Japan, despite the fact that more than three-quarters of our total GDP comes from services.
There is enormous scope for growth here.
I recognise that for some service Australian service providers Japan may be a challenging market.
But I also believe that Australia has some natural strengths we should draw on to further develop this trade.
Take the financial services sector as an example.
In the 1980s, Australia completely overhauled our retirement funding system system.
We made it compulsory for all Australians to save for their retirement.
That has led in the past 20 years to the amassing of a large amount of funds in Australia.
And those funds of around 1 trillion dollars form the basis of our funds management industry.
Our industry is now the fourth-largest in the world.
It is dynamic and innovative.
And it is well-regulated.
Japan, too, has huge amounts of funds in its pension funds  -  estimated to be around 2 trillion US dollars.
I think we could both gain a lot from building bridges between our two sectors  -  particularly because they have a combined net worth of around 3 trillion US dollars.
Our financial sectors have both amassed a lot of experience.
Our professionals have skills that they can use in both markets.
We should look at how we can create more opportunities for our financial sector professionals and institutions to access each other's markets.
Australia's financial services sector is globally competitive and it brings with it some natural attributes that should allow it to make the most of opportunities in Japan.
We are in the same time zone as Japan.
We have a highly skilled workforce.
And we have an increasing number of professionals who know their way around Asia, and specifically who know their way around Japan.
I had lunch today with financial service sector representatives from Australia and Japan and it showed me just how much potential there is in the sector  -  and how much enthusiasm there is in the business community.
I look forward to discussing with Prime Minister Fukuda tomorrow how we can further develop this relationship by expanding the dialogue between our regulators and companies.
And, of course, by creating service sector opportunities through our free trade agreement negotiations.
If we are to secure the benefits from our economic relationship into the future, we need to think about how we move forward.
There are specific sectors  -  such as the five sectors I mentioned earlier: green technology, bio-technology, food technology, education exports and financial services  -  where we can develop our contacts.
And cooperation in these new sectors can be building blocks to a new relationship.
We should be ambitious.
The Australian Government is committed to concluding a comprehensive, high-quality FTA with Japan.
It is not just about increasing the trade in goods.
We should be looking at our FTA to remove barriers to investment, to spur growth in the services trade, and to develop other new areas of economic cooperation.
I recognise that Japan has sensitivities in some sectors.
But at this stage of the negotiations we should be aiming for the best, most comprehensive agreement we can develop.
One reason we need to aim for an ambitious agreement is that we need to develop agreements that support the global trade system  -  the World Trade Organisation.
Australia and Japan have been key beneficiaries of the rules-based open trading system.
Japan has had access to global markets for its products.
Australia has been able to trade freely around the world.
So we have to ensure that our trading relationships help support, maintain and build that system rather than undermine it.
We also need to think about how we can support businesses not just bilaterally but also in the Asia Pacific region.
APEC has done a lot of great work in the past 20 years.
It has built a strong consensus behind the idea that open markets and economic reform are the best way to drive economic development.
I am a strong supporter of APEC  -  not just because it is a symbol of Australia-Japan cooperation in the region  -  but because it makes a difference.
But I also think that we need to begin discussing where we want our regional organisations to be in the year 2020.
The APEC goal is for free and open trade and investment in the Asia Pacific no later than the year 2020.
It is a goal we should continue to pursue.
With Japan hosting APEC in 2010, the next few years presents an excellent opportunity for us to continue working together on the big challenges facing our region.
And Australia and Japan work closely together in all other existing regional organisations, such as the East Asia Summit.
We were pleased to support Japan's initiative for a second-track study on an ASEAN plus 6 FTA.
We are also working together to advance regional financial cooperation through this initiative.
I hope that we can work closely together, too, as we look to the next phase of regional architecture and move towards developing an Asia Pacific Community for 2020 and beyond.
In a speech last week I announced that Australia would be appointing a high-level envoy to travel around the region and hold discussions on how we bring our region even closer together  -  how we develop an Asia Pacific Community.
The envoy is going to be Dick Woolcott, the distinguished former Australian diplomat who played such an important role in developing APEC.
He will be coming to Japan as part of his travels and I would be keen for you  -  the Japanese business community to meet with him and share your ideas about what an Asia Pacific Community should be.
I realise it is going to take some time to develop these ideas.
But we have to start now and move towards our goal over time.
And the goal is simple  -  a regional body that can deal with all of the important challenges we face  -  political, economic and security-related.
Part of our goal with the Asia-Pacific Community is to build our ties with the region.
To do that Australia needs a pool of people that know about Asia.
We need a pool of people that understand the languages and the cultures of the region.
We need a pool of people as comfortable doing business in Tokyo as they are doing business in Tasmania.
That is why the Australian Government is committed to making Australia the most Asia-literate country in the collective West.
We already have a strong base to build on.
There are between two and three hundred thousand kids at Australian schools studying the Japanese language.
It is the most studied foreign language in Australia.
And in the recent Budget, we committed $62 million to building on this base.
That money will go to boosting our teaching of Japanese, Chinese, Korean and Indonesian.
Our hope is that we will be able to double the number of students studying one of these four target languages in the final years of high school by 2020.
I am also pleased that we have many community programs that help boost this understanding  -  particularly exchange student programs run by individual schools and community organisations.
Beyond our high schools, we have a strong base of university level education and research about the region, and Japan.
Australia has invested with some success over the years in becoming an Asia-literate country.
Japanese studies has led the field.
This is a national priority for Australia.
The strength and richness of Japanese studies in Australia is reflected in the fact that 33 of Australia's 40 universities and its leading technical colleges include Japanese studies in their curricula.
There were over 15,000 student enrolments in Japanese language or Japan-related courses at Australian universities at the time of the last Japan Foundation sponsored survey of Japanese studies in 2003.
That number has risen slightly over the last 5 years.
The Australian National University, my old university, is recognised as having one of world's leading research programs on many facets of Japan's society, history, culture, economy, politics and law.
And it has some really interesting programs.
For instance, ANU hooks up its law students with students in Tokyo for legal negotiating practice sessions in real-time.
The ANU students in some groups conduct their entire negotiations in Japanese.
It is a great example of innovative teaching and training that builds our skills base  -  and it does it in the professional services sector that is one of our strengths.
Just over 50 years ago the Australia-Japan economic relationship began its remarkable growth.
That growth has continued through to today and it has provided the basis for the comprehensive relationship we have today  -  a relationship that covers security cooperation, working together in the region, and a commitment to trade and development.
This Australian Government is committed to making that relationship even stronger.
The first 50 years was about industrial development and leveraging off complementarities, to build Japan's world class manufacturing and consumer product industries and to build Australia's world class agricultural and resources industries.
The next 50 years has to be about combining these complementarities with our well educated workforces and our innovative natural entrepreneurs to create a continuing economic partnership based upon services and value adding as well as our traditional strengths in the energy and resource fields.
I want to acknowledge the crucial role in our relationship that has been played by our business communities.
And I want to assure you that we see the business sector as partners with government in building this relationship and taking it forward.


Thank you very much Prime Minister Fukuda, both to yourself and to the Government and people of Japan for making myself and my wife Therese feel so welcome in this beautiful country. 
We've enjoyed our stay, our visit in Hiroshima, in Kyoto, in Nagoya, Yokohama and now here in Tokyo.
Australia has a strong friend and partner in Japan and Australia has a strong friend and partner in Prime Minister Fukuda.
Australia and Japan have a comprehensive strategic security and economic partnership. Our partnership is not just based on common interest, it is also based on common values and an enduring friendship.
We are both democracies. We are both open economies. We are both strong allies of the United States. We have so much in common that we can actually deliver great good to the world acting in partnership together.
The Prime Minister and I have agreed to expand our bilateral security cooperation and our trilateral security cooperation with our common ally the United States. We believe this enhances the stability of the Asia Pacific region.
I thank Prime Minister Fukuda for Japan's positive response to Australia's proposal for an international commission on nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament.
I visited Hiroshima on my first day here in Japan as Prime Minister. It was the first time an Australia Prime Minister has visited Hiroshima. And I understand it was one of the first times that any serving western head of government has visited Hiroshima. We should learn from Hiroshima and act together globally on the question of nuclear non-proliferation and the future of a nuclear weapons free world.
We've agreed as Prime Minsters to continue to expand our economic relationship, inject further efforts into the FTA negotiations and I particularly appreciate our inclusion in our joint declaration today on the importance of the services trade also between our two countries and its future.
I acknowledge and appreciate the strong global leadership displayed by Prime Minister Fukuda on the challenge which we all face on climate change. I appreciate also his strong statement of support for Australia's decision to ratify Kyoto. We will work together in the lead up to the G8 outreach meeting, and the major economies meeting, and Australia looks forward to working closely with Prime Minister Fukuda's Government in making those meetings a success.
We also discussed global oil prices, this great global oil shock which all of our economies are experiencing at present. And the impact on petrol prices. And we've agreed to work closely together on international action on this question. And I understand it will be a matter for discussion also at the G8 Summit.
Prime Minister Fukuda on regional cooperation and institutions made an important speech on the 22nd May about Japan's future engagement with our own region.
I strongly support the thrust of his speech and I thank Japan for their positive response to the proposal and the discussions associated with the proposal that I put forward for an Asia Pacific community. We look forward to working with each other on advancing these proposals for the future of our region together.
On whaling, Prime Minister Fukuda and I agreed that you can have disagreements between friends. It's one of the good products of us both being strong democracies. We've also agree that this disagreement should not undermine in any way the strength and positive nature of our overall bilateral relationship and that we'll be working in the period ahead diplomatically in search of a solution on this question.
And finally, I've extended an invitation to Prime Minister Fukuda to visit Australia next year as my guest. In Japan here the other day, at one of the AEON supermarkets, I had a chance to eat some Aussie Beef here in Tokyo. If the Prime Minister could come to Australia I look forward to having a barbeque at the Prime Minister's Lodge in Canberra and throwing some Aussie Beef on the barbeque for you.
And thank you very much.


This is my second visit to Indonesia since I became Prime Minister last year.
My first visit was to Bali to the UN Climate Change Conference, where I also had a chance to meet with President Yudhoyono and talk about the relationship between our two countries.
It was a great pleasure to meet him again this morning and have a formal discussion about our vision for where we take this unique relationship between Australia and Indonesia.
In our discussion this morning I was reminded once again of the incredible changes that have taken place here in Indonesia.
It has been a remarkable decade for Indonesia.
Few countries have been through so much in such a short period of time  -  the Asian Financial Crisis, the transition to democracy, terrorist attacks and the terrible tsunami of December 2004.
What is remarkable is that Indonesia has not just come through these changes, it has triumphed.
The variety of voices in the public debate in Indonesia and the vibrancy of the media are testament to the depth of the democratic roots that have been laid.
Indonesia's economy is growing at around six per cent.
And Indonesia has been at the forefront of the international fight against terrorism.
Not only that, Indonesia has also strengthened its regional and global leadership role at the same time  -  particularly under the leadership of President Yudhoyono and particularly with Indonesia hosting last year's critical meeting of the UN Climate Change conference.
So, before I begin, I want to acknowledge and put on record that the Australian Government admires what the Indonesian Government has achieved in the past decade.
Australia
In Australia we have had a change of government.
We have come to Government committed to strong economic management, building a fairer Australia and investing in the future so that Australia is prepared to meet the challenges of the 21st century.
Domestically, that means investing in our people.
It means investing in our infrastructure.
It means deregulation and creating a seamless national economy.
All aimed at boosting long-term productivity growth and boost Australia's long-term global competitiveness.
At the same time, we are committed to building a fairer Australia  -  including for Indigenous Australians.
The new Australian Government is also international in its outlook.
We are committed to building strong relationships with our key partners  -  key partners like Indonesia.
But we also believe that foreign relations cannot be based solely on bilateral relations.
To help underpin security, stability and prosperity we need strong regional institutions and we need to support the maintenance and the development of the global rules-based order.
Australia and Indonesia
That is the fundamental approach the Australian Government brings to its relationship with Indonesia.
We want to work towards a better future for the people of Australia and a better future for the people of Indonesia.
The best way for us to do that, is in partnership.
Australia and Indonesia are inseparable partners.
Ours is a relationship that has evolved a lot in the last 60 years  -  from the time when Australia first supported Indonesian independence to the strong, close and increasingly comprehensive partnership we have today.
Today I would like to speak about the partnership we have between Australia and Indonesia and how we should take this partnership forward.
Shared Challenges  -  economic growth and development
The Australian and Indonesian Governments share a common goal of economic development for our countries.
We have different circumstance and different attributes, but we are both after sustainable development for our people.
Today I discussed with President Yudhoyono the new country strategy that the Australian Government has developed with its Indonesian partners.
The program will run for five years and is an indication of our long-term commitment to our relationship with Indonesia.
Tomorrow in Aceh I will formally launch the Aceh component of the strategy.
I also look forward to seeing some of the development projects we have been working on together there.
But economic development is mainly about the private sector.
I want to congratulate the business people that are here today.
You are at the forefront of our economic relationship  -  you are the ones finding and developing commercial opportunities.
It is not always easy doing business across international boundaries.
I recognise the hard work and commitment that goes into building and maintaining business relationships.
Our job in government is to make it as easy as possible to do business.
That means helping to bring down barriers to trade.
We can also work regionally  -  through the FTA we are negotiating between Australia, New Zealand and the member countries of ASEAN.
I would like to see us moving quickly through these complex negotiations to get an outcome as soon as we can.
If we can link both of our economies to the wider region through this agreement, it will provide some real opportunities for growth.
We can also do more bilaterally  -  I hope that the feasibility study into a free trade agreement between Australia and Indonesia will show that there are great gains to be made if we open up our economies more to each other.
We can work more broadly too  -  particularly in APEC where business and investment facilitation is a key focus.
And we can work globally.
The World Trade Organisation talks are at a critical stage and we need governments around the world  -  supported by the voice of business  -  to make a push to conclude an ambitious deal before time gets away from us.
Because it is the WTO that has set the stage for the remarkable growth in trade and the global economy over the past six decades.
Indonesia plays an important role in these global trade talks as the Chair of the Group of 33  -  the major group of developing countries at the negotiations.
These are tough negotiations  -  I accept that.
But I think we should all keep in mind what we stand to gain from an ambitious outcome to the round  -  and what we stand to lose if the round fails.
Shared challenges  -  working together globally
Continued economic development is crucial to both our countries.
But we also need to build a sustainable future for our countries and our region.
And there is no greater challenge in building a sustainable future than climate change.
We have to act to tackle climate change.
The economic cost of inaction will be much greater than the economic cost of action.
Australia and Indonesia share the goal of reducing global greenhouse gas emissions.
For Indonesia, one of the biggest challenges is reducing deforestation.
I was very pleased today that President Yudhoyono and I signed a Forest Carbon Partnership that commits our two countries to work together more closely in this area.
Around 20 per cent of global greenhouse gas emissions comes from deforestation.
So it is a critical element in the fight against climate change.
But land clearing is a path to a better economic future for people in many cases.
So how do we recognise the value of keeping rainforests and at the same time provide opportunities for economic development?
One answer to this question is to tie rainforest protection to emerging global carbon markets.
We need to set a value  -  a real dollar value  -  on the carbon stored in rainforests.
But before we can do that, we have to know how much carbon there is.
That is where Australia can help.
Using a combination of satellite technology and on the ground monitoring, we have developed a system to measure the amount of carbon stored in forests that is widely regarded as world's best practice.
Over time, as the forest is monitored, changes in the amount of carbon can be measured and quantified.
Then, in the long run, this information can feed into carbon markets.
The carbon credits from avoided deforestation  -  in other words the preservation of rainforests  -  could be an alternative source of revenue for Indonesia.
This is not a straightforward process.
Carbon markets are still developing.
But President Yudhoyono and I agreed today to develop a roadmap for linking forest carbon and global carbon markets.
There is real potential for Australia and Indonesia to lead the world here.
We share a goal of having avoided deforestation recognised in future climate change agreements.
We will be working closely together in the lead up to the G8 meeting in Japan next month  -  where President Yudhoyono and I will both attend the outreach session with its focus on climate change.
Australia and Indonesia have already shown that we can lead the world in other areas.
The regional inter-faith dialogue process that began in 2004 is a great example of this.
The dialogue brings together people from Australia, Indonesia and from around the region to share their ideas and discuss their faiths.
It gives people a chance to focus on what brings us together, what joins us, rather than what might separate us.
I am a strong supporter of the inter-faith dialogue and I want to see it continue and expand in the years ahead.
I am pleased to announce today that Australia will host the next round of this dialogue.
I think that this regional dialogue has been such a success that we should look at how we can share our experience with the wider international community.
I think we should look at how we can take the dialogue to the world.
We will be exploring with our co-chairs and co-sponsors of the dialogue how we can invite others to participate in the dialogue.
Climate change and interfaith dialogue are both examples of Australia and Indonesia working together on global challenges.
Our cooperation sets a great example about what we can achieve  -  particularly when countries that belong to different international groups decide to act as a bridge between their groups.
Shared Security
Beyond cooperation on the big question of climate change and our work on interfaith dialogue, our shared geography makes us partners in a wide range of matters.
For instance in fighting against terrorism.
Australians and Indonesians have both suffered from the scourge of terrorism.
We have seen innocent people murdered.
And we have responded by strong, practical cooperation in preventing terrorism and tracking down the perpetrators.
I want to pay tribute to the close cooperation we have in this area  -  particularly between our law enforcement agencies.
I am committed to maintaining and strengthening that cooperation.
But our security cooperation is broader than counter-terrorism.
We have the Lombok Treaty that sets the tone for this wider security cooperation.
And it provides a framework for increased cooperation in defence, law enforcement, and other critical areas including aviation and maritime security.
President Yudhoyono and I discussed the Treaty today and we agreed to develop a detailed plan for increased defence cooperation  -  one of the key aims of the treaty.
People-to-people Relations
Of course our relationship extends far beyond the important area of security cooperation.
We realise that bringing together a wide range of people from our countries pays real dividends.
I am keen to see our people-to-people ties spread more widely.
I have said before that I want to make Australia the most Asia-literate country in the collective West.
This is not a purely academic exercise  -  although education is a critical part of the puzzle.
It is about increasing the chances for people from Australia to get together with people from countries around the region, to sit down and talk and learn about each other.
We already have over 170,000 students studying Indonesian in Australia.
I want to see that number rise.
The Australian Government announced in the Budget that we are going to allocate $62 million over three years to boost the study of Asian languages in Australia.
Indonesian is one of the target languages, and part of the funding will go to helping language teachers in Australia spending some time in the country of the languages they teach.
It will give them a better understanding of Indonesia and some deeper personal ties.
It will give them more knowledge to help teach the next generation of Australians.
And this is a two-way street.
We want the people of Indonesia to have more opportunities to learn about Australia.
So I was delighted today that we agreed to get officials to work on establishing a work and holiday visa program.
A shared region
Another important element of our relationship is our regional cooperation.
Australia's future  -  like that of Indonesia  -  will depend on developments in our immediate neighbourhood.
We both want to see a stable, open and prosperous region develop.
Indonesia has long played a regional leadership role.
Particularly in ASEAN whose headquarters I will visit later today.
As the earliest of the regional organisations, ASEAN has been a model for the region.
It has shown how cooperation and dialogue can be built in and has set an example of what can be achieved.
Australia is a strong supporter of ASEAN  -  particularly having been its first dialogue partner since 1974.
We recognised early that Australia and ASEAN needed to build a partnership because we were after the same thing  -  stability in our region.
Australia has a particularly close relationship with Indonesia in regional organisations.
Look at APEC for example.
APEC has led the way in building cooperation across our broader region.
For instance, APEC is now playing an important role in building cooperation in response to natural disasters across the region.
And recent tragic disasters in Burma and China remind us how important this work is  -  disasters in our region continue to lead to a dramatic loss of life.
Australia and Indonesia are the leaders of a task force within APEC that is looking at how to bring our experts across the region together.
This morning President Yudhoyono and I agreed to lift the tempo of this task force's work.
We will be working with Indonesia to host a workshop on damage assessment techniques.
This is critical to building our capacity to respond to disasters  -  the more accurately we can assess damage the better we can tailor our responses.
Furthermore President Yudhoyono and I agreed that we would take to the APEC Leaders' Meeting in Lima, Peru this year a joint proposal on how to better coordinate regional disaster response work.
Australia is driving a feasibility study on a regional centre for disaster relief coordination.
This study will feed into the proposal we take to APEC.
We have a good history of cooperation to build on  -  we worked together to set up the Indian Ocean tsunami warning system in 2005.
There is also another aspect to regional cooperation that I would like to talk about.
The working-level cooperation we have on matters like disaster relief has the capacity to make a real difference.
But we also need to think about the bigger strategic question of what sort of regional institutions we want to see evolve throughout this century.
Our region is going through historic changes.
The rise of India and China is driving the region's economic growth  -  and that of the wider world.
And the region's share of the global economy is growing.
By 2020 Asia is expected to make up 45 per cent of global GDP.
It will account for one-third of global trade.
By 2020 Asia's share of global military spending will be nearly one-quarter.
In other words, global economic and strategic weight is shifting to Asia.
So we need to anticipate the consequences of these changes and work to shape the region's future.
One critical element of this is thinking about how to develop the next stage of our regional architecture.
Because strong institutions are needed to underpin an open, stable and sustainable region.
Our existing regional institutions all have positive roles to play.
APEC brings together a wide range of economies, including at the leaders level, every year.
ASEAN has led the way in developing a sense of community in South-East Asia and it has formed the basis for a range of other important groupings - ASEAN plus three (ASEAN and the North-East Asian countries China, Japan and the Republic of Korea), and the ASEAN Regional Forum (ASEAN plus 11 others).
And the most recent addition is the East Asia Summit (bringing together ASEAN, the North East Asian countries and, Australia, New Zealand and India).
But we need to think about the next stage of evolution of our regional organisations.
None of the existing mechanisms as currently configured is capable of achieving what the region needs to effectively shape the future.
Because what the region needs is an organisation capable of handling political, economic and security dialogue.
An organisation that brings together all of the major countries  -  the United States, Indonesia, India, Japan, China and Australia.
An organisation also capable of marshalling cooperation and, where agreed, common action in these areas.
We need to encourage in our region the development of a genuine and comprehensive sense of community whose habitual operating principle is cooperation.
We need to start thinking about how we develop our organisations  -  how we get to the next level.
We need to start the debate now if we are to effectively shape the region's future.
That is why I announced last week that Australia will initiate consultations over the next six months in the region's capitals.
We have appointed a high-level envoy, Dick Woolcott (a former Australian Ambassador to Indonesia of course) to carry out these consultations.
Next year, subject to those consultations, we would envisage the possibility of convening a conference of government and non-government representatives to advance the proposal.
The proposal is an extension of APEC's original vision of an Asia-Pacific Community.
This proposal is not about economic or monetary union, or even a customs union.
It is not about a political union.
It is not about a security pact.
It does not envisage any diminution in national sovereignty.
Nor does it necessarily envisage any diminution of any of the existing regional bodies or existing security alliances or other similar arrangements.
The proposal embraces an Asia-Pacific Free Trade Agreement and other steps that we are already looking at towards greater economic integration in the region.
But it must be about more than just economic cooperation.
It should include confidence-building measures designed to promote greater openness, transparency and cooperation around the region.
We need to start this conversation, this debate.
Because if we do not we run the risk that we will drift towards the idea that in our rapidly changing region conflict at some stage is, somehow, inevitable.
In the early 1990s, Australia's Prime Minister Paul Keating and Indonesia's President Suharto worked together to establish the APEC Leaders Meeting.
That meeting took APEC's work to the next level  -  it made APEC the only forum that brings together the leaders of our region every year.
It is now time that we think about how to realise the original APEC vision of establishing an Asia Pacific Community.
It is time to begin thinking about how our region should look in 2020.
Moving ahead
Australia and Indonesia have a big work agenda ahead of us.
And our work will be taken forward on the strong base of our existing ties across.
But we need to bring together people from all sectors  -  government, business, and the academic and wider community sectors  -  to generate new ideas to develop our relationship.
I am pleased to announce today that the Australian Government intends to host in 2009 a major conference on the future of Australia-Indonesia relations.
Our goal is to bring together people who have had a long involvement with relations between our two countries and people who are experts and leaders in their fields but have perhaps not had the chance to get involved.
We will bring them all together and get some ideas about how to move ahead.
We will be talking with our friends in Indonesia over the next few months about organising this conference and thinking about where we take this partnership.
We need to start imaging together where we want this relationship to be by 2020.
Australia's and Indonesia come to each other with vastly different histories.
One of us represents the Group of 77  -  the developing countries.
One of us is of the West.
One predominantly Christian.
The other the world's most populous Muslim nation.
But we also come together with much in common.
We are democracies that are committed to making a contribution to our region and to our world.
We are committed to working with each other to build our relationship.
Today, in my talks with President Yudhoyono, we agreed to take our partnership to a new level.
A new level that will build on our strong bilateral economic, political and security links.
But equally importantly, we made a new commitment to work in partnership in the world.
We have much work to do to meet the challenges of our time  -  from climate change and terrorism to sustainable development and response to natural disasters.
By combining our strengths, I believe that our partnership can be a model to the world of cooperation.
I am committed to that goal.
Thank you.


Introductory Remarks 
Thank you very much for giving us Australians such a warm and friendly New Zealand welcome.
This fifth meeting of the Australia-New Zealand Leadership Forum brings together an impressive group of government, business and academic leaders who have come together to advance our shared interests and goals. The Forum thus provides an invaluable opportunity to deepen the already close and fond relationship that exists between our two countries.
As our Prime Minister Kevin Rudd said to Prime Minister Helen Clark when she visited Australia in February, the relationship between Australia and New Zealand is ‘as close as it gets'. We enjoy strong and multi-faceted ties, founded on a unique shared history and a wide range of common interests. Where we have occasional differences, we never lose sight of the overall health of the relationship. The close cooperative partnership between Australia and New Zealand has over the years shown its robustness and resilience. It also makes each of us stronger.
It's a relationship so close that  -  as you know too well  -  we Australians sometimes conveniently forget to mention that some of our most talented people are in fact Kiwis. I'm talking of course about people like Crowded House and Russell Crowe, whom we've ‘borrowed' from time to time. In fact we've created a new term ‘New Zealand Australian' to try to take credit for our good fortune in having such talented neighbours. These people-to-people contacts are extensive in both directions. Despite growing international competition, New Zealand retains its place as one of Australia's favourite holiday destinations. In this chill winter season, Australian skiers head for New Zealand's snowfields.
Of course while we may sometimes neglect to mention the New Zealand heritage of some of our most talented residents, there's one thing we never neglect to mention  -  that's the word ANZAC. We were reminded of this connection when Prime Minister Clark visited Sydney in late April to unveil a new statue of a New Zealand digger at one end of the ANZAC Bridge, standing as a silent sentinel opposite his Australian comrade in arms. I can't think of another two sovereign countries prepared to incorporate another nation's name into that of their own armed forces and to share one of the truly formative moments in their national histories. That really says it all.
Let me also make clear that the new Government in Australia is looking to inject renewed vigour into our trans-Tasman relationship. The presence of such a strong team of my Ministerial colleagues at this Forum attests to this commitment.
Today I want to give an overview of some the foreign and domestic priorities of the Rudd Government. I see it as particularly important that decision makers and opinion leaders in New Zealand are aware of these policies because of their trans-Tasman implications. I should add that, on many issues Australia and New Zealand share common cause. We are thus keen to secure New Zealand's input, support and engagement on issues where we can work effectively together, both in domestic and international contexts.
As you will notice, our federal constitution has focused our national reform efforts around a new era of inter-state cooperation through the Council of Australian Governments known as COAG. While our system obviously differs with New Zealand's more unitary state, I know that New Zealand participates actively in many COAG forums where we embrace similar challenges and goals.
     * Global challenges like climate change, energy security and migration.
     * Regional challenges like maintaining democracy and stability in the Pacific, and building a wider Asia-Pacific Community which brings in all the key players, including the United States, Japan, China, India and Indonesia.
     * And domestic challenges like investing in the education and health of our people to ensure we prosper in the world-wide human capital revolution. Our two countries are renowned for knowledge and creativity. There are also significant numbers of expatriate Australians and New Zealanders spread across the world, including in key leadership positions in major economic centres. We thus have a joint interest in working out how to benefit from our educational and cultural investments.
Since taking office, the Rudd Government has made significant steps to implement an ambitious agenda spanning economic and social reform and changes to Australia's international role as a middle power.
The priorities in these areas are largely set by our election commitments.
They add up to a set of priorities covering every sector of Australia's economy, society and polity.
The Regional Reform Agenda 
I want to start with our shared regional agendas where Australia and New Zealand have a solid track record of achievement over many years.
The Rudd Government is committed to a new era of revitalised engagement and cooperation with Pacific island countries based on principles of mutual respect and responsibility. A key element of this strategy is close collaboration with New Zealand.
The Prime Minister's Port Moresby Declaration of 6 March this year affirms Australia's commitment to the Pacific. A key element is Pacific Partnerships for Development, through which Australia will provide increased development assistance over time in return for commitments from individual governments to improve governance, increase investment in economic infrastructure and achieve better outcomes in health and education. Working closely with New Zealand, we are also promoting closer economic integration of Pacific Island countries with Australia and New Zealand where our Closer Economic Relations agreement serves as a model. We see such integration as crucial to the region's development and long-term sustainability. We are also looking at creative options such as establishing an Australian seasonal labour mobility scheme for Pacific Island countries. In this regard, we have found New Zealand's experience instructive. We have very much appreciated the willingness of the New Zealand Government and other stakeholders to discuss with us the NZ Regional Seasonal Employment scheme.
Looking to the wider region, we have to prepare ourselves for the coming of the Asia Pacific Century.
As Prime Minister Rudd said last week, global economic and strategic weight is shifting rapidly to our part of the world. And it's in our interests to try to shape the outcome.
This means we need strong global and regional partnerships and institutions to underpin stability.
It was with that in mind that last week that the Prime Minister signalled his intention to engage neighbouring countries in a dialogue about establishing a potential Asia Pacific Community as a structure for discussing security, economic and environmental issues of joint concern.
It's a long and involved process that will require much dialogue. And it's our full intention to engage closely with our friends across the Tasman as we start to explore the possibility further.
The Domestic Reform Agenda
Of course, prospering in this age of immense change also requires far-reaching domestic reform. Given our CER partnership and resulting interdependence, changes at the Australian end naturally have implications for New Zealand.
At the heart of our domestic priorities lies our commitment to responsible economic management.
Clearly, international economic and business cycles are producing a very different environment from the one Australia has enjoyed for the past decade.
Our response to those pressures, and managing the risks of major international price shocks, requires ongoing reform to lay the foundations for sustained growth.
So our first order of priority for nations like ours is the development of long-term strategies and investments to lift productivity and enhance our international competitiveness.
In Australia this means things like:
     * The review and reform of federal - state relations and reducing the dysfunctional federalism that's acting as a brake on economic growth;
     * Reducing the burden, and increasing the efficiency, of tax and regulatory systems to support the potential for business to contribute to the economy;
     * Improving and increasing infrastructure, especially in the supply of water, in transport, in energy and in broadband;
     * Increasing workforce participation to support both individual opportunity and economic growth;
     * Implementing an effective, market-based response to climate change;
     * Pursuing more international trading opportunities for our businesses; and
     * Creating systems of excellence in early childhood, school, vocational and higher education.
Within each of those priority areas for reform, we have or are in the process of implementing major commitments.
In our view this is the modern agenda for nation building that we believe will become a model for similar countries around the world.
We have set in train processes to further expand the depth and breadth of that reform agenda.
We've been criticised for setting up a large number of major reviews of existing policies and programs. This is something we are totally unapologetic about, because those reviews are providing the government with the sort of detailed, expert, evidence-based understanding of its policy options we need to carry off long-lasting reform in areas of great complexity and uncertainty: climate change, national security, defence capability, national innovation systems, sectoral economic reforms and so on. A new direction for any nation can't rest on ideology or half-baked solutions; it must be based on evidence.
Those reviews are also an important opportunity to broaden the sources of policy advice to the government by seeking out expertise from the private sector, the non-government sector, academia and other levels of government.
Two innovations may be of particular interest  -  a new role for the Council of Australian Governments and our recent 2020 Summit.
From a once-yearly consultative mechanism, the extensive COAG process, in which New Zealand participates through the Ministerial Councils, is becoming a dynamic part of our nation's system of government. This recognises that improving national efficiency and productivity relies on the states and local government as well as the Commonwealth.
COAG will now meet more regularly, including four times in 2008.
And its aim will be to get all public services working with joint purpose across the whole reform agenda to raise national productivity and improve social equity, including: health and ageing; education, skills, training and early childhood; climate change and water; infrastructure; business regulation and competition; housing and Indigenous reform.
Seven Working Groups  -  comprising federal ministers and senior state and federal officials  -  have been established to drive ongoing change and to develop and implement the COAG reform agenda in these areas.
And the decisions of COAG will be joined by a more effective framework for federal financial relations, which will link federal payments to the states to the advancement of reform, including new National Partnership funds to promote innovative service improvements.
You may have followed in the press the recent 2020 Summit  -  which brought a thousand of our nation's brightest minds from across the whole of society together to set an agenda for the future.
It was a highly successful event which captured ideas for building a modern nation ready for the challenges of the 21st century.
The Government is moving quickly to develop a comprehensive response to the ideas raised at the Summit.
Lead Ministers have been allocated to each main idea, and a reference group of senior government officials has been established to ensure that this work is properly coordinated and progressed within the timeframes.
Ideas from the Summit will be used in different ways  -  some will inform the development of policy, others may lead to specific programs or ways of doing things. We believe they will produce important new directions for the country.
It is already clear that a large percentage of ideas have links to existing policy and program initiatives. Almost one third of the group of about 140 top ideas generated from the Summit have been supported, in various ways, in this year's Budget. Fifty of the key ideas are directly related to the work of COAG.
The initial report of the Summit's outcomes has been published and is available on the 2020 website. In addition, the 2020 website will continue to receive public submissions and comments.
The Prime Minister has asked for a comprehensive response to the ideas of the 2020 Summit to be provided to him at the end of the year.
This is a clear indication of the government's intension to further expand its reform efforts during its first term of office.
Governance Forum
Finally, a distinct set of priorities applies to the business of government itself. Good government is about developing a long-term strategic view, putting in place the right machinery, policies and programs, and striving for highly effective implementation and delivery of services which produce national benefits.
To achieve this:
     * A more rigorous and open appointments system for major public bodies has been instituted;
     * The Prime Minister has released the Government's Standards of Ministerial Ethics which contain important initiatives to restore and improve ministerial accountability;
     * We have established a Register of Lobbyists;
     * We are promoting a culture of pro-disclosure of information including the establishment of an Freedom of Information Commissioner; and
     * We are holding regular Community Cabinet meetings across Australia which allow Australians from all walks of life to directly engage with Cabinet ministers and senior public servants in person.
This also requires a public service focused on policy development and implementation and one that has the necessary capabilities  -  the skills, resources and systems in place to support effective implementation. As the Prime Minister said in his recent speech to the Senior Executive of the Australian Public Service ‘Good policy is one thing. But good policy without effective program implementation is a dead letter'. So another of our reform goals is the creation of a leading-edge public service.
Concluding Remarks
These are just some of the key elements of the reform agenda the new Australian Government is committed to introducing and which my colleagues will be expanding upon in our discussions during this Forum.
After such a lengthy period out of office, and during a time of rapid economic, social and environmental change, we're determined to be a government of reform.
In the past, Australia has been a world leader in economic and social reform. We want her to be so again  -  and to be an innovator in tackling the new challenges of climate change, Asia- Pacific growth and regional integration.
New Zealand  -  which also has an enviable track record on innovation and reform, and which shares many important interests with Australia  -  is a natural partner in these endeavours. We are thus looking forward to working alongside New Zealand on these challenging and exciting agendas. We have much to learn from each other and can amplify our regional and global influence by close collaborative effort.
Thank you.


I first visited here only a few weeks after the tsunami. And, it is difficult not to remember the terrible scenes of that time.
I remember seeing so many people's lives tragically affected. So much destruction, so much devastation, so much sadness. So when I come back here, I feel very much as if we are on sacred ground.
Sacred ground because more than 150,000 innocent men, women and children lost their lives by this terrible act of nature. Sacred ground also because those of us who came from Australia to help also saw the loss of some of our own lives.
So, for us, this is sacred ground too because nine of our own  -  members of the Australian Defence Force, working here to help our friends in Indonesia  -  lost their own lives. We honour their service and their sacrifice.
What is extraordinary in the intervening three years and more is how this great community in Aceh, and this great country Indonesia, have responded to this devastation.
Not just in the extraordinary act of rebuilding this community, but also, in seeking the opportunity created by the devastation of the tsunami to heal the wounds of the past in the civil conflict which had racked this place, Aceh, for so many years.
Physical wounds being healed. Political wounds being healed. It is a great testament to the people of Aceh and Indonesia that you have done this with such great success.
We in Australia have tried to play our part in the rebuilding of this beautiful part of Indonesia. And today I would publicly honour the role played by former Prime Minister John Howard in his right decision to contribute $1 billion for a reconstruction package for Indonesia, and for his decision to allocate a quarter of a billion dollars to this province of Aceh. And to dedicate so much of that money to the building of schools like this one.
Prime Minister Howard's decision to support the rebuilding of this community was the right decision. The right decision for Australia. The right decision for Indonesia. And the right decision for Aceh. And I thank him for it publicly.
Which brings us to this beautiful school at Ulee Lheue. This school says so much in its own way about the impact of the tsunami.
Of its 312 students, 297 were killed. Of its teachers, most were killed. I think 17. This is unimaginable in any local community for that to have happened. But now, you have rebuilt. And I salute the courage of this community for having rebuilt this school.
And across Aceh, more than one in ten teachers lost their lives and across Aceh 38,000 school students lost their lives. For us, unimaginable. And I salute the people of Aceh for having rebuilt their communities and their schools across this land here.
Australia has contributed some quarter of a billion dollars to the reconstruction of Aceh. $51 million for the restoration of education here in Aceh. And we're visiting one such school today. And we are very pleased to be here. 
What we have through our friends in Indonesia have been able to fund is the reconstruction of 18 education facilities in tsunami affected areas. 43 primary schools in conflict affected areas. And trained more than 4,100 education officials, teachers, and school community members.
This is our small contribution to try and help rebuild this community.
And so, when I visited the classroom before with Therese and with the Governor and the other officials from the administration here in Banda Aceh, and to see the smiles on the young students faces, and to know that they are at a school which we have helped to rebuild, and helped to support, it makes every Australian heart glad.
For the future Australia also intends to be long term partners with the people of Aceh and its community here in Banda Aceh for the long term economic development of this part of Indonesia.
It's very much a practical example which I think speaks to the world at large about what a country like Australia, a western country, predominantly Christian, can do in partnership with our friends here in Indonesia, the largest Muslim country in the world. A product of the respect that we have for each other.
So, could I thank all of our friends here in Banda Aceh. Those from the Government, those from the education sector, those from this school. All those who have been part of the building process.
Also, the Australian Government officials. In particular, those from the Australian Embassy in Jakarta, and the AusAid officials who have been here working from the beginning to help ensure that this project succeeded.
And so it is with great pleasure that I am able to be here today on behalf of the Government and the people of Australia to participate in this official inauguration of the Ulee Lheue State Islamic Primary School. And we wish all the children here who study, a wonderful future, as we wish a wonderful future to the people of Aceh and the people of Indonesia.


I've lived in Beijing a bit myself over the years and you're going to have a great time. 
The closest I got to competitive sport in Beijing was playing for Australia in the Australian team in Beijing in cricket. There were only 12 Australians in China at the time and I was selected as 12th man. As our captain said I never troubled the scorekeepers much. But I tell you what no one ever read of any score of mine but they are going to be watching how you guys go. All of us are going to follow it with a huge amount of personal interest and pride. 
Australians love sport. Australians love the Olympics and Australians love Australian sportsmen and women representing their country at the Olympics. Your part of a very proud history which goes back now more than 100 years. 
This is all an essential part of who we are as Australians. From the big cities to the outback Australians are now itching for the action to begin. We will all be glued to the TV sets watching every step along the way. Every success, every not success, every striving, every competitive sprit that we will see on the competitive field of sport when you are up there. 
Australians will be there right behind you, everyone of us, because you do us proud. The opportunity to compete in the Olympics and the Paralympics is, in itself, an incredible achievement for each of you. It means you have earned the right  -  through hard work and training  -  to represent your country at the highest level. 
And I'd just like to say to each and every one of you before you go be proud of your achievement. Absolutely proud of your achievement. To have reached this height, to be part of this great Australian team. Its something which so many Australians aspire to and so few achieve. 
So each of you prior to any calculation of who gets medals or who doesn't, just be proud of the fact that you have made it to Team Australia, representing Australia at these games and I salute you. 
You've now got of course the further summit to climb. Taking to the track, the field, the pool, the range or the water, you will be up against now the best in the world. 
You will be among athletes who have also dedicated themselves to excellence in your chosen field. The competition will be intense. You will all be after the same thing. You will be intense competitors, you will be rivals, you will be striving for the prize. 
But I say again the prize that you have already achieved is to be part of this great team. 
It does make you part of an exclusive club, and it creates a unique bond among athletes. Even individual sports, its important that everyone, everyone plays their part. And the people who have played their part over the years have been your mums and dads, your coaches, all those dedicated folk picking you up at 4:30 in the morning. Taking you off to a swimming pool at 5 (am). Week in, week out  -  year in, year out. 
There's just a hope and a dream in your mum and dads eye, your coaches eye that maybe you'd crack the team and the same for the athletes. And I think it's a time to reflect on the thanks that we all owe the dedicated mums and dads and coaches of Australia, in order to get you to the stage that you have reached. 
The sacrifices made by your families are many, and I suspect they will be more nervous, more excited and more proud than each one of you. A sporting career only comes to rely on so many people the coaches, trainers, nutritionists and others and more and more so as you approach the peak of your sport. 
In Beijing, you will be supported by some of the best coaches, sports scientists and support staff in the world. They are just as dedicated and I'm sure they're also pretty excited too. 
To each of you who are coaches and trainers, nutritionists and other staff supporting our athletes here today, can I also say to you thank you on behalf of the nation. Your dedication and support of these proud athletes is also so important to the country and I thank you for your professionalism.
 The Australian Institute of Sport, the AIS is a famous brand in world sport. It is little wonder that other countries have tried to pinch our techniques and tap into our expertise, because the AIS has done so well. Despite their best efforts, I'm sure that the AIS will again ensure Australian athletes are the best prepared they can be in going forward to these Olympics. 
I am also pretty sure that you will be watched like hawks over the next 50 days  -  your training, your diet, whether you sleep, make sure you get plenty of sleep. Because all of that's important in helping, the athletes to prepare for the final events in Beijing. 
I was in Beijing just a few months ago. I can tell you that the games really are transforming the city. The anticipation is huge, and I am sure the Chinese will be absolutely magnificent hosts to each and every one of you. 
Like in all big cities, there will be a few challenges in Beijing, there always are at Olympics time. But I am sure that it you will overcome any hurdles that you are presented with, just as you have done many past Olympics and those who have preceded you have done at every Olympics back to 1986.
 I am looking forward to being their with you myself and I am confirming today that I'll be in Beijing at the invitation of the Chinese Government for the opening of the games and to be there cheering you on for the few events. 
I like so many Australians will be there with pride watching you, cheering you on and urging you to do you absolute best for Australia as I know you will. 
Today, I want to wish all of you the very best  -  athletes, coaches, sports scientists and other support staff. And with your big day looming, I just leave you with one simple message. 
As you embark on this journey, know this and know this as you go through each and every difficult minute and hour and day of the competitive weeks that lie ahead of you. And that is this: your country Australia is so very proud of you, so very proud of you. Good luck.  


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
I'm proud to speak to you today  -  as the first Prime Minister from Queensland to address this Queensland State conference in almost a century.
I'm proud to come here with my Queenslander colleague and friend, Wayne Swan  -  the first Federal Treasurer from Queensland in a third of a century.
I'm proud also to share a stage with a great Premier, who has broken new ground for women in Queensland, Anna Bligh.
And beyond that I'd like to say thank you to this Queensland branch, and to all Queenslanders, for the large number of Queenslanders we returned to the Australian Parliament  -  the equal largest number of Queensland Federal Labor MPs ever in the nation's history.
And beyond politics, I'm looking forward to seeing Quentin Bryce in a few weeks' time and saying, G'day, Governor-General.
This isn't a ‘pineapple coup', as some have said - it's a timely recognition of this great state's role in Australia's future.
Queensland's contribution to the nation
Queensland is in the driving seat of the national economy.
     * Queensland grew 6.8 per cent in the last financial year, the 11th consecutive year in which Queensland exceeded Australia's economic growth rate.
     * For the seventh year in a row, Queensland will outstrip the growth of every other State except Western Australia.
     * Queensland now contributes $187 billion to national income and $35 billion to the nation's exports  -  53 per cent more than just five years ago.
     * In the past five years Queensland has created more than 367,000 new jobs, while the population has grown by close to half a million people in that period.
And this is not the first time that Queensland has led the nation.
Queensland saw the world's first Labor government in the world in 1899.
A Queenslander also led the first majority government in Australian history  -  Andrew Fisher's Labor Government.
And it is now one hundred years since Andrew Fisher first became Prime Minister in 1908.
But today, I come to speak to you about a 21st century Labor government with a vision for a stronger Australia, a fairer Australia, a more secure Australia, and an Australia capable of meeting the challenges of the 21st century.
But first I come to say thank you. Our success last year was the result of many people working enormously hard, and nowhere more so than in this State.
Thank you to the rank and file members of the Queensland branch who worked tirelessly to see the election of an Australian Labor Government.
Thank you to all members of the labour movement in Queensland, whose efforts through the ‘Your Rights at Work' campaign made such a difference on the ground.
Thank you also to our past State Secretary Milton Dick, and to our new State Secretary Anthony Chisholm, for your relentless hard work.
All those efforts helped deliver the largest swing we recorded anywhere in the nation  -  a swing of 7.5 per cent to Labor.
We achieved our best ever two-party preferred vote against the Coalition.
We won 9 seats in Queensland, the best performance in any state.
As a result we have:
     * Shayne Neumann in Blair;
     * Kerry Rea in Bonner;
     * James Bidgood in Dawson;
     * Chris Trevor in Flynn;
     * Brett Raguse in Forde;
     * Jim Turnour in Leichhardt;
     * Jon Sullivan in Longman;
     * Graham Perrett in Moreton, and
     * Yvette D'Ath in Petrie.
Queensland also elected a new Senator, Mark Furner.
And we also say thank you to all of our Labor candidates who fought hard in seats across the whole state.
In particular, we acknowledge the efforts of three candidates who were beaten by thin margins of less than one percent:
     * Jason Young in Bowman;
     * Fiona McNamara in Dickson, and
     * George Colbran in Herbert.
As we welcome the new members of our movement, we also note with sadness the passing last year of those who fought the fight and kept the faith.
Clem Jones made an immeasurable lifelong contribution to Queensland and the Labor Party, and especially to building the modern city of Brisbane.
And Tom Burns was the heart and soul of our movement for half a century.
Today I also want to thank Premier Anna Bligh for her leadership of this great State.
Anna is a leader who looks over the horizon to the long-term challenges facing the State.
She's a genuine partner in building a new, modern Australian Federation that will deliver a better deal for Queensland.
     * A better deal through improved health services.
     * A better deal through cutting regulation for business.
     * And a better deal through a genuine national partnership in building the infrastructure Queensland needs for now and for the future.
Governing for the future: Labor's great tradition
The great task of Labor governments  -  whether at a Federal or State level  -  is to govern for the future.
We are the party tasked with navigating the nation's future.
Opposing us is a party lost in the past.
That is why our Labor Governments are committed to reform.
To build a stronger Australia.
To build a fairer Australia.
To build a forward-looking Australia, ready for the challenges of the future.
Think of the great legacy of Andrew Fisher, Queensland's first Prime Minister.
He built a stronger Australia through a program of nation-building:
building the fundamentals of national defence policy including establishing the Royal Australian Navy in 1910;
     * establishing the seat of national government in the Australian Capital Territory, and
     * establishing the Commonwealth Bank.
Under Andrew Fisher, Labor also built a fairer Australia:
     * extending old age and invalid pensions;
     * building a fairer industrial relations system, extending the arbitration system and introducing workers' compensation for Commonwealth employees, and
     * introducing a baby bonus for mothers and helping reduce infant mortality.
These measures helped provide financial security for generations of Australians.
One hundred years later, new challenges fall to us.
Our challenge is to build a modern Australia that's capable of tackling the challenges of the new century that is now unfolding.
We've come to government amidst what the International Monetary Fund described as the greatest global financial shock since the Great Depression.
We have come to government at a time when the nation has been hit by the greatest global oil shock in more than thirty years.
And we've come to government with the highest inflation rate in 16 years, with ten interest rate rises in a row after the Australian people had been told that interest rates would be kept at record lows.
And in a longer term sense, the global economic map is now being re-drawn by the rise of China.
The rise of India.
And the great global and environmental challenge that is climate change.
In this time of great change, our task is to make Australia stronger and fairer, and to equip Australia with the long term strength to tackle the challenges of the 21st century.
A stronger Australia
The Government inherited an economy that had been weakened by years of long-term neglect.
The previous Government had fed the demand side of the economy with its lavish spending, but ignored the supply side  -  the nation's skill base, its infrastructure and regulation reform.
The result was the fastest-rising inflation in 16 years, and an increasingly uncompetitive economy.
These were unusually difficult economic conditions in which to frame a Budget.
But we delivered a responsible Budget, that addressed both the immediate and longer term challenges facing the economy.
We achieved a strong surplus of $22 billion and made tough spending decisions, reducing spending by over $7 billion.
This means that fiscal policy is targeted at fighting inflation and ease pressure on interest rates.
Looking forward, we must retain this fiscal discipline.
Because we must ensure that government spending does not fuel inflation, and we must focus spending on our long-term priority to lift productivity growth by investing in the future.
That is why the Government has begun an education revolution  -  with the long term objective of building the best educated, best trained and best skilled workforce in the world.
The Budget included major new initiatives in early childhood education, computers and trades training centres in every secondary school, 630,000 new training places over the next five years and thousands of new university scholarships.
But beyond this year's Budget, we've also established the $11 billion Education Investment Fund for the future  -  to invest in the 21st century needs of our universities and TAFE colleges.
Advanced infrastructure is also critical to building a stronger economy.
The Government has now established a $20 billion Building Australia Fund to fund future infrastructure needs.
We've also established Infrastructure Australia, the lead agency that will bring together Commonwealth and State expertise on infrastructure planning.
Its infrastructure audit will be completed early next year, providing us with a national Infrastructure Priority List by March 2009.
Our current competitive assessment process will determine the private sector partner for the new, high-speed, National Broadband Network, which will bring Australia fully into the digital economy of the 21st century.
The Government has also begun a new era of Commonwealth/State relations, to end the blame game, build a modern Federation and move towards a seamless national economy.
This is a big agenda. Andrew Fisher began working on matters like uniform railway gauges a century ago  -  and yet in 2008 we still don't have a national system of business name registration.
But the good news is, we are making progress. We are working through 27 priority laws for regulation reform.
And I salute the work being done by Craig Emerson in this important task for the Federation.
And I look forward to further progress when COAG meets early next month.
Perhaps our greatest long term challenge of all is climate change.
As the interim Garnaut Report highlighted, Australia is more exposed to the impact of climate change than probably any industrialised nation.
From the day we took office, we began taking action after more than a decade of denial and neglect.
Within minutes of taking office, the Government signed the instruments to ratify the Kyoto Protocol.
We are now active participants in the Bali Roadmap on climate change.
And we're hard at work in designing the emissions trading scheme  -  one of the most important economic reforms of the next decade.
Delegates, we recognise that we've taken on a challenging workload.
But there's a long way to catch up to our competitors.
The pace of change in the world around us is matched only by the neglect and complacency of the Government that preceded us.
A fairer Australia
If we build a stronger economy for the long term, we can build a fairer Australia.
Like the Fisher Government of a century ago, we're committed to a fair go today for all Australians.
We believe that as a Labor government it is our responsibility to challenge the limitations placed on people's potential by the circumstances they inherit.
...Whether they're born into a remote Indigenous community, a family that's just made its home in Australia, or a fast-growing regional area.
A fairer Australia starts with fairness in the workplace.
Last year we committed to abolishing Australian Workplace Agreements for the future.
This year we honoured that commitment.
The Government is also delivering on our commitment to build a modern, fair and flexible industrial relations system.
We're now building a decent safety net for the future  -  and this week, we announced the National Employment Standards that will be the foundation of the new safety net.
We're consulting widely now, and later this year we will introduce the legislation for our new national workplace relations system.
The Government believes the purpose of a strong economy is that it delivers greater prosperity and a better life for all Australians.
That's why the Budget made no apology for tipping the scales back in favour of working families.
At its centre was a $55 billion Working Families Support Package.
That package helps families meet the increasing costs of living by providing tax cuts, and help with rising child care fees and the costs of education and housing.
Not everyone understands the reality of those pressures.
Last year the Liberals were telling us that working families have never been better off.
And this year, they've told us that rising inflation is a fairy tale.
The Government understands that families are under financial pressure because of rising costs of living such as mortgages, rents, petrol, groceries and childcare.
We know that we can't ease all the financial pressures on working families.
But we can make a difference  -  by focusing help on those who need it the most.
That's why we also made additional provision in the Budget for the most needy in our community:
     * An additional $5.2 billion for Australia's 2.2 million seniors, compared with $1.5 billion in Mr Howard's last Budget  -  giving pensioners $900 in additional benefits compared with $500 in additional benefits under the previous Government's last Budget.
     * An additional $1.1 billion for Australia's 430,000 carers in this Budget - giving recipients of both the carer's payments and the carer's allowance an additional payment this year of $2,100  -  compared with the $1,600 provided in the previous Government's last Budget.
     * For the first time, an additional $500 utilities allowance for disability support pensioners  -  at a cost of $1.16 billion over five years. That compares to them receiving nothing additional under the previous Government's last Budget.
No national government can turn around trends in global oil markets.
But governments can assist by helping the overall family Budget.
The Government has delivered $52 for the typical working family, while Mr Nelson promises relief worth just $2.50.
Governments can also help by boosting consumer power. That is why we are establishing FuelWatch  -  to help motorists get the best deal at the bowser.
Governments can also assist by applying pressure to OPEC in partnership with other governments, which is why Martin Ferguson is going to the meeting in Jedda this weekend.
Governments can also assist by planning for the future, such as with fuel efficient cars.
That's why through the Green Car Innovation Fund the Government is working with the three car manufacturers to ensure we are building the next generation of hybrid cars here in Australia. We are delighted with Toyota's commitment to build a hybrid Camry from 2010.
The Liberals oppose each of these measures because they have decided just to play politics with petrol  -  to do anything and say anything to get a headline.
We're also acting on housing affordability.
In the months ahead, we will also launch the First Home Saver Accounts, we will call for the first Expression of Interest for the construction of new affordable rental properties, and we'll use the Housing Affordability Fund to help reduce infrastructure charges and development delays that add to the cost of new homes.
Building a fairer Australia also means delivering universal, high quality health services to all Australians.
The Government announced a $3.2 billion National Health and Hospitals Reform Plan in the Budget.
This is just a start. We recognise that the health care system needs major long-term reform.
That's why we established a $10 billion Health and Hospitals Fund, and a National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission. We look forward to its interim report at the end of the year.
Anniversary of the Northern Territory Emergency Response
In building a fairer Australia, there can be no greater priority than closing the appalling gap in life opportunities for Indigenous Australians.
On 15 June last year the Little Children are Sacred report revealed shocking levels of child sexual abuse in 45 Indigenous communities in the Northern Territory.
Six days later the Northern Territory Emergency Response was launched  -  recognising that this was an issue demanding immediate national action to urgently protect children in these remote communities.
Today is its first anniversary, and this morning, the Minister for Families, Communities and Indigenous Affairs, Jenny Macklin, released a report on progress after the first year.
One year on, the Australian Government remains committed to the emergency response and determined to maintain its momentum.
Its effectiveness is critical to the change that's essential if Indigenous children are to be safe and healthy, growing up in families and communities which nurture and protect them.
We have learnt a lot from the first year.
We've learnt that much can be achieved working in partnership with Indigenous communities.
And that achieving real change involves new approaches and strong, forward-thinking leadership.
Important progress is being made, with more police on the ground, people feeling safer, 11,000 health checks for children with follow-up treatment, a major investment in housing and infrastructure, and 200 additional teachers being recruited over the next five years to teach the 2000 children previously not enrolled.
Income management has now been extended to more than 13,000 people in 52 communities, with licensed community stores reporting increased purchases of fresh food and more money spent on children.
The NT Emergency Response Task Force has now presented its final report to the Government.
It outlines the achievements of the NTER over the past 12 months and puts forward a range of recommendations across the areas of child protection, education, health, education housing, stores and community safety.
We will be closely considering their advice.
We have also begun a review of the NTER, headed by three experienced and highly regarded figures in Indigenous affairs.
We expect this report in October this year, and will then be mapping out the way forward both in the Northern Territory and beyond.
In the meantime, the implementation of the Emergency Response continues.
Progress has been made in the last 12 months, but much remains to be done to meet our targets to close the gap on Indigenous life opportunities.
Planning for the future
Long term policy is necessary for infrastructure, education, health and for tackling Indigenous disadvantage.
But perhaps our greatest long term challenge for the future is climate change.
As the interim Garnaut Report highlighted, Australia is more exposed to the impact of climate change than probably any industrialised nation.
From the day we took office, we began taking action after more than a decade of denial and neglect.
Within minutes of taking office, the Government signed the instruments to ratify the Kyoto Protocol.
We are now active participants in the Bali Roadmap on climate change.
And we're hard at work in designing the emissions trading scheme  -  one of the most important economic reforms of the next decade.
Delegates, we recognise that we've taken on a challenging workload.
But there's a long way to catch up to our competitors.
But the Government is determined to act.
Delivering for Queensland
Today I've outlined a wide-ranging program for a stronger and fairer Australia, and an Australia that plans for the long term future.
It is a demanding program.
But it is also a necessary program.
But it means delivering outcomes on the ground, where it counts.
So let me mention some of the ways we're delivering on Queensland's critical infrastructure needs.
With 1,700 people crossing the border into Queensland every week, infrastructure in south-east Queensland is under great stress.
It's estimated that by 2020 urban congestion will cost families and businesses in Brisbane more than $3 billion.
That's the economic cost  -  but there's a social cost too, with many commuters spending more time in their cars than they do with their kids.
That's why the Government is taking decisive action to combat congestion and get our cities moving again.
In 2008-09, we will invest $826 million in nation-building road projects in Queensland.
This includes $63 million to make an early start on our election commitments  -  getting work going 12 months ahead of schedule on projects like the Townsville Port Access Road and the Pacific Motorway.
We're also committed to the full upgrade of South East Queensland's worst road  -  the Ipswich Motorway.
We've allocated $2 billion to upgrade the priority sections between Dinmore to Darra to six lanes, and further work will be assessed by either Infrastructure Australia and built by either the Building Australia Fund or under the next Auslink.
We've also entered into a $20 million partnership with the Bligh Government to plan the next stage of the Gateway Motorway upgrade.
It's Brisbane's only north-south bypass, it's part of the national network and yet the Coalition wouldn't put a cent into fixing it.
But the Government also understands that Queensland is Australia's most decentralised mainland state.
40% of those who come to Queensland every week move to regional areas, especially to booming cities like Gladstone, Mackay and Cairns.
And the artery that runs through the heart of these communities is the Bruce Highway.
That's why, after years of neglect, the Government has a $2.2 billion plan to upgrade the Bruce.
Over $150 million will be spent in 2008-09 on widening in Caboolture and Gympie and safety and flood works in north Queensland.
Delegates, to build a stronger, fairer and more secure Australia, and an Australia that plans for the future, not that simply allows the future to plan for us - we must remain in government.
And that comes back to you, and your efforts on behalf of the great Labor cause.
We're proud of the extraordinary results we gained in November.
But we would lose the next election with just a small swing against us.
We are in times of exceptional global financial volatility.
We realise that makes it more challenging to deliver on our long term plans.
But it also makes them more important.
We know as well that because Labor Governments are committed to reform, we always face higher expectations.
In delivering our plan for the future, we must govern with discipline, with focus and with absolute unity of purpose.
We must be willing to make difficult decisions in the nation's long term interest.
We are the party of the future.
The party that can best lead change.
We've governed this nation through many difficult times in the century past.
We face greater challenges ahead.
But together, we can and will deliver for the people of Australia


Today the Australian nation says thank you to you the men and women of the Australian Defence Force.
Today the Australian nation says thank you to the men and women of the Australian Defence Force for your service in Iraq.
And I can say right now, also, my thanks to the city of Brisbane for making you so welcome today in this welcome home parade. Thank you, Brisbane.
And to be in this great city, in this great city hall, my Mum told me during the war that when she was a nurse at the Mater Hospital, this was the best place to come and meet a man in uniform at a dance.
And she was right. It's the place to be.
There is no higher calling than to wear the uniform of Australia.
You are the proud inheritors of the Anzac tradition. And, that tradition now reaches back a hundred years.
You, like them, are responding to the nation's call.
You, like them, have learned the profession or arms.
And you, like them, are men and women of courage.
And in your lives and in your service, you exhibit these great values of the Australian Defence Force, and the nation honours you.
As the nation thanks you today, for your service in Iraq, the nation also thanks those continuing to serve in Iraq, in Afghanistan, across the Middle East, and elsewhere in the world.
You have served, and they continue to serve, in dangerous theatres.
They serve in difficult theatres.
They serve in bloody theatres.
And the nation must never forget that you, the men and women of the defence force, here today, and those serving abroad today, continue to put yourself in harms way.
That requires courage, and it's that courage we salute today as well.
Today we therefore thank those who have served in Iraq.
Today we thank those who continue to serve in Iraq, and other theatres abroad.
But today the nation also thanks those who make that service possible  -  you the families of the Australian Defence Force.
The Mums and the Dads. The brothers, the sisters, the wives, the husbands, boyfriends, girlfriends, partners. Grannies. And the flock of kids that I see in front of me.
You make it possible for our men and women in uniform to serve because you are their lifeline to Australia.
I honour you the families of the Australian defence community.
The Australian nation must remain vigilant about its national security. The threats from our security remain real, and the Australian Defence Force is the frontline our nation has in meeting those threats. Which is why the defence of our country must remain strong.
Freedom is not for free. Freedom comes at a price. And you are our frontline in the defence of our freedom. And for that, I thank you.
As I have been (inaudible) in Iraq, on one and two occasions, and seen how you have worked in the field, can I also say this, you are not just soldiers, proudly bearing the tradition of the profession of arms in this country, you are more than soldiers. You are ambassadors of Australia.
And I have seen you take the great name of Australia to that theatre, to that troubled land, and advance the great name of Australia even further.
So yours has been a mission not just in uniform. Yours has been a mission beyond the uniform as well. Advancing our great name as a country prepared to lend a helping hand to those in need. And for that, we thank you.
Soldiers of Australia, and ambassadors of Australia, I extend therefore to you on behalf of the Government of the nation, and on behalf of the people of the nation, the thanks of the nation.


I would like to thank the Malaysia-Australia Business Council and the Australia-Malaysia Business Council for hosting today's lunch.
The Councils do a great job in promoting the economic ties between our two countries and I want to acknowledge their contribution and commitment.
It is a great pleasure to back in Kuala Lumpur.
I have enjoyed visiting this city in the past.
Each time I come back the changes are remarkable.
Malaysia is a country with a remarkable record of national achievement and contribution to the region.
There is real strength to the ties between our two nations.
A strength that comes from the history we share.
But also a strength from the future we can shape together.
What ties us together are the bonds that have grown between our people over more than half a century.
During the Second World War Australians came to defend the Peninsula.
They fought, were captured, suffered and died here and in Singapore
In the Post-War years they came to provide security and stability as the modern nation of Malaysia came into being.
And all of these veterans formed a strong bond with this country and her people.
They still come back.
Each year, the veterans and the families of veterans of the Malaya Emergency and the Second World War come back and visit Malaysia.
Over 35,000 of them have served here from the Second World War on.
But the traffic has not all been one way.
Australia has been happy to welcome hundreds of thousands of Malaysians to study in Australia over the years.
In their teens and twenties, young Malaysians come to Australia to study.
They get to know about us.
They make friends.
They might even learn about rugby or Aussie rules football and other high cultural pursuits.
And they come back to Malaysia and they maintain those connections with Australia.
They maintain their memories of their time in Australia.
It is those personal experiences that tie our two countries together.
We also have the contemporary ties of migration.
The Malaysian-Australian community has made a great contribution to Australia's development  -  including through our Climate Change Minister Penny Wong, who has Malaysian heritage.
Going back, we have many ties between us.
But our relationship is also very contemporary.
And it is also a relationship about how we shape the future together.
We face many of the same challenges domestically, regionally and globally.
And we have great scope to cooperate even more closely in meeting those challenges.
Before I talk about how the new Australian Government hopes to build on our ties, I want to explain a little about the Government itself.
We were sworn in as the new Government just over seven months ago.
And we were elected on a platform of responsible economic management, investing in the nation's future in education and infrastructure, and tackling the big long-term challenges like climate change, water and our future in this Asia-Pacific region at the dawn of this century of the Asia Pacific.
In an uncertain global economy, the Government has brought down a responsible budget based on a 22 billion dollar surplus  -  one of the largest in the nation's history.
The Government has established an 11 billion dollar education fund to invest in the future needs of our universities and our vocational education institutions.
The Government has also established for the first time a 20 billion dollar Building Australia Fund to invest in our future infrastructure needs in roads, rail, ports and high-speed broadband.
And through the Council of Australian Governments, we have begun a process of national regulatory reform with the long-term goal of creating a seamless national market.
We have a big agenda.
But it is one we have to implement if we want to secure Australia's future.
When I was reading about the Malaysian Budget before coming here, I was struck by how similar our approaches are in some ways.
We both realise the importance of investing in our human and physical capital.
Both Governments are focusing on the same areas with the same aims  -  making sure our nations are as competitive as they can be in the highly competitive global economy of the 21st century.
This is not surprising.
Our populations are about the same size.
And both our populations are an example of bringing together people from diverse backgrounds.
Our two economies have a strong emphasis on resources.
But we are also both diverse economies  -  strong in the manufacturing, agricultural and services sectors.
To ensure prosperity for our nations, it is critical that we have the right domestic policy settings.
But we also need to engage the global economy beyond.
Malaysia has a rich history as an international trading centre.
It has been a meeting point of trade routes, cultures, peoples and religions for many centuries.
Most famous is the city of Melaka  -  home of Malaysian hero Hang Tuah  -  which dominated the region's trade routes in the 15th century and was a meeting point and melting pot for many of the diverse influences that gave rise to the modern nation of Malaysia.
As the 21st Century goes on, we are all going to have to follow the example of Melaka and ensure our prosperity and development through openness and engagement.
We will all need to be more connected, more globalised than ever.
If we want to thrive, we will need to be fully engaged with the global economy.
The development in the economic relationship between our two countries is an example of this.
We have both benefited from our economic engagement.
Malaysia is Australia's 11th-largest trading partner.
And Australia is Malaysia's 11th-largest trading partner.
The headline figures in the growth in trade have been impressive  -  trade has grown at over 10 per cent annually in recent years.
But what is more impressive is the range of connections being formed and the remarkable growth in Australian investment in Malaysia in recent years.
ANZ Bank has invested a billion dollars in Malaysia's Ambank.
Media Monitors are here with more than 50 staff here in Kuala Lumpur extending their very successful Australian business model to Malaysia.
Australian and Malaysian companies are working together here, in Australia and around the world in the resources sector.
And I understand that the Convention Centre we are in today is managed by an Australia-Malaysia joint venture.
The list goes on and on.
The members of the two Business Councils are at the forefront of this and I want to thank all of you here today for your efforts.
You are the people who are building these ties.
Whether you are large or small, your contribution to strengthening the economic ties between our two countries is important and appreciated.
Our job in government is to provide not only the domestic environment to help businesses thrive, but to help remove barriers to trade and investment around the world  -  to create more opportunities for you to do business; to make it easier for you to do business.
And there is a lot of work being done on this front.
We are negotiating an FTA between Australia and New Zealand and all of the ASEAN countries.
Australia and New Zealand have had a free trade agreement  -  what we call the Closer Economic Relations agreement (CER)  -  for 25 years.
The idea is to link our bilateral FTA with the ASEAN group.
It is a complex negotiation with 10 in the ASEAN group and two in the ANZ group.
But we are getting close to finalising the negotiations.
I am hopeful that we can overcome the last obstacles in the months ahead.
For many products, that would mean that the ASEAN and the ANZ markets become one  -  a market with a combined GDP of 2.3 trillion US dollars.
Bigger than India at 1.1 trillion US dollars and nearly three-quarters the size of China's 3.3 trillion dollar economy.
Already, four out of ten Australian exporters sell their products to ASEAN countries.
That would be a great outcome for businesses operating between Australia and Malaysia.
An outcome that we hope will spur even more growth in our trade and investment links.
At the same time we are negotiating a bilateral free trade agreement.
Prime Minister Abdullah and I agreed today that as soon as the ASEAN-ANZ negotiations are concluded, Australia and Malaysia will invigorate our bilateral negotiations with the aim of reaching a quick and mutually beneficial conclusion.
In doing so we will continue to consult widely with stakeholders in both our countries  -  including many of you here today  -  to ensure that we know what barriers to trade and investment need to be addressed.
For Australia, getting a good outcome for the services sector is particularly important.
Our funds management sector is now the fourth-largest in the world with around one trillion dollars under management.
It is a sector of the Australian economy that has developed rapidly in recent years and it has world-class skills to offer the world.
I hope that we can find further opportunities for our financial services sector to work closely together in the years ahead.
A good outcome on a trade agreement between our two countries would be another boost to our trade.
Of course, sitting above all of this is the World Trade Organisation negotiations that have been underway since 2001.
I have just come from Japan where I attended the G8 Outreach Summit and we agreed that pushing for an outcome on these negotiations is a global priority.
I met Brazil's President Lula and the trade negotiations were a feature of our discussions  -  Brazil is a critical nation in the negotiations.
It was also a feature of discussions I had with other leaders.
In the negotiations we are getting closer to a deal.
But, for a whole range of reasons, time is also running out.
We have to get agreement this year  -  and as soon as possible this year  -  if we want to see the benefits of the deal flow through to the global economy over the next couple of years.
On 21 July, trade ministers will meet in Geneva to thrash out a deal.
This meeting is likely to be the make or break point of the negotiations.
Australia and Malaysia have long been close allies in the WTO negotiations.
And I want to see us continuing to work closely together in the next critical months.
We are both in the Cairns Group of agricultural exporting nations.
We both want to see freer trade in agricultural products.
But we also want to see freer trade in manufactured goods and, importantly, in services.
For Australia, the services sector is a critical part of the Doha negotiations.
Our economy is nearly three-quarters services, but it makes up less than one-quarter of our exports.
One reason for this discrepancy is barriers to trade in services around the world.
I am pleased that Trade Ministers will meet in Geneva later this month to finalise the package on these core areas of the Round.
If they do, we will have a good framework for a deal before the end of the year.
And at a time of economic uncertainty with rising global energy and food prices, a good Doha outcome will be an important psychological boost for the business world.
Whatever happens with the Doha Round, one thing is clear in terms of the global economy  -  in the 21st Century, the Asia-Pacific region will become even more important to the global economy.
Look at some of the remarkable figures.
Japan, as a 5 trillion US dollar economy, is the second-largest economy in the world.
China has foreign exchange reserves of USD$1.6 trillion and its economy is growing at around 10 per cent a year.
The value of India's exports has grown at an average of nearly 20 per cent a year over the past decade.
The ASEAN countries  -  having sprung back from the 1997 Asian Financial Crisis  -  have had average economic growth of six per cent annually over the past five years.
Also in the Asia-Pacific region is the United States.
By far the world's biggest economy.
And still the leader and innovator in so many economic and technological fields.
The point of these figures is to show that global economic and strategic weight is shifting to the Asia-Pacific region in what will be the Asia Pacific century.
To make the most of that, we need an open and a stable region.
We need a region at peace, and engaged with the rest of the world.
The question, then, is how do we ensure that we get what we need?
The Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) is an example of the benefits of long-term vision.
Forty-one years ago, leaders in South-East Asia took the farsighted decision to establish ASEAN.
And, since then, in a diverse region, ASEAN has brought together a varied group and forged a common outlook on many questions.
ASEAN has built habits of cooperation and dialogue.
And ASEAN has played a critical role in building and maintaining peace in the region through its work.
ASEAN will remain central to the region's future architecture.
A month ago in Sydney, I announced that Australia would begin a series of regional consultations about the future of the region, culminating if warranted in an international conference next year.
The aspiration of an Asia-Pacific Community was part of the dynamic which led to the establishment of APEC.
Twenty years after APEC was established, I think we need to start the discussion about where we want to be in 2020 and beyond in terms of our regional architecture.
There will be different views on where we need to go; how we should get there; and about how fast we should move.
My own view is that we need a regional organisation that includes all of the major players  -  from the United States to India, Japan and China and of course Australia, Malaysia and the ASEAN countries among others.
And we need an organisation that can discuss all of the challenges we will face in the century ahead  -  economic, political and security challenges.
Australia and Malaysia have long been at the forefront of the discussion about our region.
Malaysia has been a driving force in ASEAN.
Australia played a key role in establishing APEC nearly 20 years ago.
For Australia, Malaysia is a key partner in this process of thinking about how we want the region to look in 2020.
I was pleased that Prime Minister Abdullah and I could discuss this today.
And I will be asking my envoy for an Asia Pacific Community, Dick Woolcott, to make sure that he comes to Malaysia early in his consultations to hear the view from Kuala Lumpur about the way forward.
I want to emphasise that the Australian proposal is about doing the necessary thinking about where we want to be in 2020.
So we have begun a process of dialogue about an Asia-Pacific Community.
Because we believe that, in a rapidly changing region, we should seek to shape the future of our region, rather than let it be shaped by events.
But ASEAN, as I indicated in my speech in Sydney, will remain at the core of the region.
And the region has much to learn from ASEAN's experience.
One reason we need robust regional institutions is to help us tackle the wider challenges we share  -  economic challenges, security challenges and political challenges.
And, among those shared challenges, none is more difficult than climate change.
Yesterday I was in Japan for a meeting with the leaders of 15 other countries.
It is a group called the Major Economies Meeting on Climate Change and Energy Security.
This group brings together 16 developed and developing countries to discuss climate change.
And yesterday we all agreed  -  it is time to act.
Both developed and developing countries need to act together  -  because the impact of climate change will be felt by all of us.
As we forge a new grand bargain on how to tackle climate change it is important that a wider range of countries are involved in efforts to slow the growth of and reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
Fast-growing emerging economies like Malaysia can play an important role in this process.
And Australia looks forward to partnering with Malaysia in the lead up to the Copenhagen climate change meeting.
Cooperation on the future of our region is something that Australia and Malaysia should be able to do well, just as we cooperate globally in areas like trade.
We should be able to work closely together because we have such a strong bilateral relationship.
And the Australian Government is committed to building on that relationship.
I am pleased to announce today that the Australian Government has decided put the Australia-Malaysia Institute on a permanent footing.
The Institute was established in 2005 for three years and it has made a strong contribution to building new links between our nations.
So we have decided that it should keep filling that important role.
It will help us take the relationship forward.
In fact, Prime Minister Abdullah and I talked a lot today about how to take our relationship forward.
And I was pleased that we were able to discuss some new initiatives.
For instance, the schools twinning program.
If we want to make sure that our two countries not only maintain our existing ties but develop them even further, we have to make sure that younger generations in both countries know each other.
I was delighted to be able to visit a school in Kuala Lumpur before this lunch.
The school is participating in a new twinning program with Australian schools.
Under this scheme, schools in Malaysia and schools in Australia will become partners.
To get us started, six schools from the state of Victoria will partner with six Malaysian schools.
The students in the partner schools will get to know each other.
And in the process, children in both countries will come to understand their counterparts.
I hope they will also come to understand how important this relationship is.
Education links between us are not new.
But they continue to grow.
We have around 20,000 Malaysian students studying in Australia.
And we have around 15,000 Malaysian students studying in more than 500 Australian programs in Malaysia.
These courses are delivered through partnerships between Australian institutions and more than 50 Malaysian institutions.
The ties go beyond teaching too.
Our researchers work together through the thirty active agreements between Australian and Malaysian universities.
The education connections between us are one of the underpinnings of the relationship.
I would like to acknowledge the presence here today of Tan Sri Dato' Seri Dr Jeffrey Cheah and Tan Sri Dato' Azman Hashim.
Two men who studied in Australia.
And two men who are the leaders in their fields.
Your personal links and your understanding of Australia are an important strand in our relationship.
It is a strand that I hope will grow.
Later today I will be involved in the launch of a full-time Australia Network channel on the ASTRO television network.
I am proud of the Government's support for Australia Network: an independent but credible voice, it will bring Australia into the homes of many Malaysians, enhancing knowledge and understanding of how we live and view the world.
The Prime Minister and I also announced today that Australia and Malaysia have agreed on a work and holiday visa scheme to be signed by our ministers.
This scheme will let young people in both countries visit the other and spend some time travelling around and doing some work.
It is another avenue for us to build the ties.
I am particularly keen to see more Australians come to Malaysia  -  either to study or to work.
The Australian Government is committed to making Australia more Asia-literate  -  and that means giving our young people more chance to learn the languages of our region.
It also means giving them more chances to spend time in the region.
Because I believe that such experiences  -  along with academic study  -  are critical to really understanding a country.
This morning Prime Minister Abdullah and I agreed on a new element to our education cooperation  -  an element that extends our cooperation to benefit third countries.
Australia and Malaysia are going to combine to provide teacher education for Afghanistan.
I think this is a great symbol of us taking our relationship to the world.
It is not just about Australia and Malaysia cooperating with each other, it is about using the depth of our relationship to make a contribution to the global community.
One area where we already have very strong exchanges is defence cooperation  -  through both the long-standing Five Power Defence Arrangement (now 37 years old) and our bilateral contacts.
In the past year, more than 2200 Australian service personnel visited Malaysia to work side-by-side with their counterparts.
And in the same period nearly 700 Malaysian defence force personnel visited Australia for the same reason.
3000 defence force personnel visiting each other's country in 12 months is a strong indication of the depth of the defence ties we have  -  and we want to expand these even further.
We conduct joint exercises.
And we conduct joint exercises with other partners in the region from time to time as well.
Our militaries work well together because they have a long history of ties and exchanges.
And the programs maintain their momentum because both sides are committed to them.
In the case of the Five Powers Defence Arrangement, the exercises are among the largest in the region.
That means that when we have to work together  -  like we have in East Timor for example  -  our soldiers can work together seamlessly.
It means we can work together on disaster relief operations when it is needed.
Our defence links are an important  -  if sometimes underappreciated  -  part of our relationship.
But like education, it has the potential for us to take our partnership to the world.
Prime Minister Abdullah and I agreed today to work together on peacekeeping training around the region.
This is another great example of our bilateral cooperation now being extended to a regional or global level.
We have many strands to our relationship.
We have to strengthen those strands and encourage new ones to develop.
Today, the Prime Minister and I agreed to a joint ministerial commission, which will involve regular meetings between our foreign ministers.
This reflects one simple fact.
Both governments want to make sure that in the years ahead, we are working together more on a wider range of challenges  -  including climate change and energy security.
The relationship between our two countries has a very strong base.
It has a base of history, of personal ties and experience, and it has a base of mutual interest in regional and global affairs.
We will face some big questions in the decades ahead:
     * How do we ensure prosperity and stability for our people in an age of rising food and oil prices and financial instability?
     * How do we deal with climate change?
     * How do we deal with the shift of global economic and strategic weight to our region?
These questions will take a lot of effort to answer.
But we will be better off if we work on the answers together.
And I believe that Australia and Malaysia should be close partners in this process.
I would like to thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
I wanted to send a clear message that Australia is committed to developing a broader, deeper relationship with Malaysia.
We want to take our bilateral relations to a new level  -  by building our strong cultural, political, economic, education and security ties.
We also want to work together in the region  -  in particular on the question of how we shape our region for the future.
And we want to work together globally on international trade, on climate change and on other challenges we face.
We are both committed members of the United Nations.
And we both have a strong history of participating in peacekeeping operations.
We can build on this shared commitment and strengthen our global cooperation too.
We are committed to building the ties between our nations, our people and government and private institutions.
We are committed to working together on regional issues.
And, in the century ahead, we are committed to working together on the big global challenges we face.


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate and honour as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
And I thank Matilda, where have you discreetly disappeared to? I have never known Matilda to discreetly disappear anywhere. Thank you very much for that exceptionally warm welcome to country. It is so important in the fabric in our celebration of what Australia is.
The Australian of the Year awards are an important part of our national life. These awards give all Australians an opportunity to take part in recognising and applauding outstanding achievement and contribution  -  in every field of national life: sports; education; the arts; business; the armed forces; scientific and medical research; charity work; strengthening the life of local communities from the bush to the suburbs, and helping those most in need, both in Australia and abroad.
These awards are also special in the way they acknowledge leadership of younger Australians, older Australians and those making a difference in local communities but those whose work would otherwise go unrecognised on the national stage.
The Australian of the Year award has been made since 1960, that's almost fifty years ago.
During the past half century it has become an increasingly important national celebration of positive achievements and of individuals who have in their lives and in their work, genuinely made a difference for Australia.
We think of names such as Joan Sutherland, ‘Weary' Dunlop, Fred Hollows, Arthur Boyd and Cathy Freeman. That is indeed a roll of honour.
They are not just outstanding Australians who excelled in their endeavours. There is something distinctively Australian about their achievements and how they rose to greatness.
The exuberance of Cathy Freeman, who can ever forget.
Fred Hollows' understated but intense commitment to better the lives of others.
The courage, compassion and heroism of ‘Weary' Dunlop.
And this year, Lee Kernaghan, the voice of country Australia.
Each of these lives tells us something not just about them, but about us as well  -  something about being Australian; something about the values to which we should most aspire.
And what is that essential value? It is I think, an essential Australian trait to believe that we become better human beings by giving to other people.
Some call it mateship, others call it being a decent neighbour, it is called many different things. But if you drill down into it and try to understand it's essence and it's fundamental being, it's essentially that.
In this country, in our own Australian way, to discover the ancient wisdom of St Francis, that it is in giving that you receive.
And that is a really good Australian thing. And it's a remarkable thing. It is about how we regard greatness within our own country, properly deserved and it is how we regard greatness in the contribution to the world beyond.
Australians of the Year are role models to a new generation of Australians. They are Australians who lift our spirits. They inspire us. The are positive role models.
They challenge us to do more than just live our lives. They challenge us to do much, much more than simply to pursue our own self interest.
That includes the distinguished winners of all of the Australian of the Year Awards  -  including:
The Young Australian of the Year award  -  won in 2008 by Casey Stoner, Australia's reigning world champion motorcycle racer, whose career began with his first national title win at the age of six.
The Senior Australian of the Year award  -  won in 2008 by David Bussau, whose work in co-founding Opportunity International has helped, literally millions of people in developing world lifting themselves out of poverty.
And Australia's Local Hero award  -  won in 2008 by the inimitable, irrepressible, incomparable Jonathon Welch, who has contributed his musical talents through the Choir of Hard Knocks, which has brought hope and inspiration to many people suffering from addictions, mental illness and homelessness.
And so we look ahead to Australia Day 2009, it is now time to think of other Australians who deserve similar acclaim.
That is why we are launching this appeal for nominations for the 2009 awards.
This is an opportunity to recognise distinguished achievement and contribution to the life of our nation.
So I would urge all Australians, young and old, country and city, to get engaged, think it through, have a yack. Work out who you think deserves this great recognition on behalf of the people of our nation.
As I travel across the length and breadth of this great land of ours, Australia, I am constantly surprised, constantly amazed at the discovery of local acts of heroism, local acts of contribution, local acts of community service, which would otherwise simply go unremarked and unnoticed beyond that community.
These are the people who we wish to recognise. It is that quality of life that we wish to emulate and to hold up high in the history of our country.
I think also as we embark upon this new year of nominating people for this great award, let's also reflect again on the core values we wish to reflect people who give of themselves to the community, people who give of themselves to the nation. People who give of themselves in Australia's building bridges with the rest of the world. Positive people. People who inspire our spirits, people who reach beyond themselves, and people who see fulfilment in that very act of giving.
It gives me great pleasure to declare nominations for the Australian of the Year Awards 2009 officially open.
I encourage every single Australian to think it through, nominate somebody, somebody who has inspired them, somebody who has lifted their spirits, and made them proud to be an Australian. Thank you.


PM: I begin by honouring the first Australians on whose land we meet and whose great cultures we celebrate as among the oldest in human history.
Australia welcomes the youth of the world to Sydney. Australia welcomes the youth of the world to this celebration of faith and this celebration of life.
And as Prime Minister of Australia I welcome you from every land, every path, every continent on this, our planet.
Prime Minister welcomes pilgrims to Australia in various languages.
And Australians. And Australians, g'day and have a great time down under.
You are here for this great celebration of life, this great celebration of faith and this great celebration of hope. And for this you are so much the light of the world at a time when the world has so much darkness.
Too often in the history of the world when young people travelled in great numbers to other parts of the world, they do so in the cause of war. But you here today are here as pilgrims of peace.
Some say there is no place for faith in the 21st Century. I say they are wrong. Some say that faith is the enemy of reason, I say, also they are wrong.
Because faith and reason are great partners in our human history and in our human future. Rich in humanity, rich in scientific progress.
Some say only that which they see wrong in Christianity and in the church, I say let us speak also about what is right in Christianity and the church.
It was the church that began first schools for the poor. It was the church that began first hospitals for the poor. It was the church that began first refuges for the poor and these great traditions continue for the future. And I say this, that Christianity has been an overwhelming force for good in the world.
Australia is a land of great freedom, a land of many cultures, a land of many faiths. But also a land deeply shaped by and proud of this nation's Christian heritage and future. And within that great Christian heritage, we honour deeply the great catholic heritage of Australia as well.
Deep in its tradition, rich in its history, vital in its future. You come here as young pilgrims of the world. I say to you as I conclude, as Prime Minister of Australia, you are welcome guests in our land. May each of you be enriched by your time here among us in Australia just as you enrich Australia by your time here with us. Welcome to Australia.


Your Holiness, Your Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen.
I acknowledge the first Australians on whose land we meet and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
On behalf of the Australian Government and the Australian people it is my great honour to welcome His Holiness, Pope Benedict XVI to Sydney, Australia for this World Youth Day.
Your Holiness, you are a very welcome guest in our country. Your Holiness in this country you are truly among friends and we are honoured as Australians, all Australians to have you with us today.
This is an occasion of great significance for the whole of the Australian community.
It is especially significant for Australia's Catholic community who make up more than one quarter of our number. Australia's Catholic community reflects the great diversity of the church worldwide, comprised of descendants from early Irish and English settlers, post-War migrants from Italy, from Malta and from other parts of Europe. And those who are arrived more recently, from diverse parts of the world, including Asia, Latin America and Lebanon and the Pacific Islands.
Australia's Catholic community likewise reflects the great physical diversity of Australia. From those who gather in the restored grandeur of St Mary's Cathedral in this great city of Sydney and to those who gather in the weathered old parish churches in the smallest towns of our outback.
Over 1300 parishes span the length and breadth of this vast Australian continent and, your Holiness, I am sure that in each one of those parishes every one of them would welcome you with open arms.
Your Holiness, you are also welcome in Australia, a welcome guest for the wider Australian Christian community. You are also welcome in Australian on behalf of those Australians of other faiths and indeed for the general Australian community at large.
Your Holiness you are welcome as an apostle of peace in an age where in an increasingly interdependent world peace is a much needed voice among us all.
Your are welcome as a voice for the world's poor. You are also welcome as a voice of hope at a time in our planet's dealings when hope is most needed of all.
It is fitting that his holinesses first visit to Australia is for the occasion of World Youth Day. In part because Australia itself is a young country, although as this young country we inhabit this vast and ancient land.
In part also because the great diversity of the pilgrims who have come to Sydney, mirror the great diversity of modern Australia. We are literally in this country, people who have come from every corner of God's earth.
And also, as we experience the sheer exuberant joy of the young people of the world who have come to this city and who have imparted their joy to us in this land. It has been a wonderful experience for us all.
Your Holiness, Indigenous Australians, our Aboriginal Australians, our Torres Strait Islander Australians have also asked me to extend to you the warmest of welcomes.
Our Indigenous people are so much part of our county's past and so much part of our country's future. It has been from time to time a troubled past. We now work to forge a common future among us all.
You Holiness, you have done us a great honour in coming to this our land Australia. We welcome your presence, we look forward to your continued events among us and we hope and pray on behalf of all Australians that your time here in Australia is a blessing not just for the people of this land, not just for the pilgrims who have come from across the world to be with us, but also for those of you who visit us for the first time as well.
Your Holiness, we welcome you.


Thanks very much and welcome to this new gathering there. (Inaudible) and Melbourne University Press had recommended that Christine and I arrive by barge, but we thought that would be a bad look so we did not.
I am glad to have read parts at least of Inside Kevin 07, because I am glad that despite Christine's super sleuth efforts, that some of our more remarkable campaign triumphs have in fact failed to make it into print.
Those of you on the campaign trail, may remember our singularly successful day in Devonport, straight out of the campaign advancers manual, at our pre-planned drop in at the Devonport Senior Citz. which resulted in three press conferences going on at once, none of them ours, all of them hostile.
And I though to myself, this is not an entirely auspicious start to this campaign. That would be matched by our day in Townsville for those of you who were there in another teaching module direct from the perfect campaign module. There we were in Townsville with Peter Garrett, launching our new bright spanking new policy on solar power, solar energy, in a classroom in a solar school, which was uniquely powered by solar energy when the lights went out.
Another less than positive augury at that stage of the campaign.
Then there is another ingredient of a happy campaign, which as you all know is a happy media contingent, which is how we managed to somehow find a plane capable of seating 50 journalists on it, packed on board with a broken loo, to fly all the way from Mackay to Perth, requiring literally, a pit stop in Alice Springs, where the only authorised loo fixer was unavailable because he apparently was significantly under the weather.
All of which made for a very happy arrival on the part of the journalistic party when they got to Perth. Again, straight out of the campaign manual.
Not to be outdone by my first candidate launch in the campaign which was in South Australia, early in the campaign. Where in spite of everything ever written in the official campaign manual about little children and animals, a very excited dog was invited to the launch and having been presented to me on stage, proceeded then to leave a very significant calling card on stage as well, reflecting precisely an early canine observation of what he thought of my campaign and my campaign prospects.
Not to be outdone by that day in Brisbane, some of you may have been there, when I did four shopping centres on the trot in a single day, when in the final of those shopping centres, an elderly lady in a wheelchair invited me quietly to come close and then invited me to put my hand on her fulsome bosom. Only to reveal that to be the nesting place of her very favourite pet marsupial.
This is all true. Her pet, a terrified sugar glider that obviously felt as if he had been somehow trapped in a ravine somewhere in the Himalayas. Such are the rigours of the campaign trail.
None of which actually made it into your book Christine, for good reason.
But the real omission of this book Christine is Lachlan Harris, only two mentions in the index, how do I know, Lachlan has told me so. Lachlan now is in deep therapy, nothing more distraught than a spin miester who has been spurned.
But I digress from the 2007 election, our subject for today. Firstly, some thank you's. And that is to the extraordinary team who supported myself and the leadership of the parliamentary Labor party in securing that election victory.
It is said and is often said as a truism that this was an effort on the part of a team. But I as the leader of the parliamentary Labor party know that to be true acutely. A team, made up of a fantastic group of human beings. A team, highly professional. A team also highly committed to the ideals for which our movement stands. And a team absolutely united in our common purpose.
And to each one of them here today from various parts of our operation, I thank them individually and collectively because without them, this simply would never have been possible.
Second, to talk a little bit about the reasons for political change itself. I would argue that there are three basic reasons Australians voted for change last November.
First, the world began changing around them and in ways that were potentially quite threatening to their understanding of their long term interests.
Second, they, that's Australians, were led by a Government that after 12 years, had shown not the slightest interest in preparing them for these great changes happening around them.
And third, they wanted instead a Government that could help navigate the nation's future through these choppy seas that lay ahead. As well as a government that was committed to extending to Australians some helping hand on the way through.
So let's take these in order. What were the changes confronting Australians at the time. First, that Australia way ahead of the rest of the world, had already moves into a high inflation, high interest rate environment that had begun to damage our standard of living. That's jus the facts as they presented themselves by the middle and toward the end of last year.
Second, Australians who were becoming wary that they were simply living off the resources boom rather than lifting their underlying productivity growth.
Third, Australians were becoming conscious that they were being left behind in the rest of the world in the education, research and science and innovation fields and new technologies like broadband.
Fourth, Australians, Australia was ignoring the damage to it's own economy, it's natural environment and it's water resources by the clear cut, absolutely clear cut, evidence of climate change.
And finally, Australians were becoming more concerned that they were now facing a much more complex region and a much more complex world than ever before. With China and India looming to dominate the 21st Century, just as the United States and the United Kingdom had dominated the 20th.
Which leads to the second core reason for political change. That the Liberals in Government exhibited no interest whatsoever to do anything about preparing Australia for these great changes unfolding around it.
And to navigate the choppy seas which therefore lay ahead. There are two pathways possible for any Government. One is to be a reformist government that anticipates the change and wherever possible gets ahead of the curve.
The other is to be a government of the status quo, ignoring emerging challenges until they become immediate crisis, and then adopting the core principle that something might just turn up.
Great for the good times, absolutely rotten, in fact downright dangerous, for the bad times.
And after 12 years in Office, the Liberals have become masters of the status quo and the Australian people saw it for what it was. No strategy on inflation despite repeated warnings from the Bank on capacity constraints. No strategy on productivity growth, in fact they denied there was a problem with productivity growth at all.
No strategy on the drivers of a 21st century knowledge economy despite reams of OECD data showing us plummet down the international league tables.
On climate change, a state of national and international denial rather than a program of practical action, and no plans to prepare for the dawn of the Asia Pacific century, not even an exit strategy from Iraq.
Which brings me to the third basic reason for change and that is the decision to turn to an alternative government ready to prepare Australia for the rocky road ahead through a clearly defined program of reform.
A clear cut anti-inflation strategy articulated in our first month in government and anchored in one of the biggest budget surpluses in our history. Second, a micro economic reform agenda to boost productivity growth on the back of a $11 billion education investment fund, a $20 billion infrastructure investment fund and a deregulation agenda backed by the BCA, the biggest the country has ever seen.
A climate change agenda at home and abroad that has travelled further in six months than our predecessors did in 12 years. And a new strategy of comprehensive engagement in our region with a reform agenda for the region's long term architecture, a reform agenda for nuclear non proliferation, in what has become the most proliferating region in the world, and a strategy to turn around the development slide here in the south pacific.
So in the six months or so since we have been elected, the global storm clouds gathering have become even darker, reinforcing the urgency for long term, responsible reform. And for a long term responsible reform agenda to see Australia through, requiring tough decisions, tough decisions for the long term, tough decisions that the Government I lead is prepared to take.
The global economy is now 12 months into a global financial crisis with real consequences for global and Australian economic growth. Global inflation now on the march off the back of what is now the third great global oil shock and an associated global food crisis.
These global factors now compounding the 16 year record high inflation that the government inherited last November that had already resulted in 10 interest rate rises in a row. And on top of all these factors, the rolling impact of climate change continuing to wreak havoc, with the Murray Darling now in significant crisis.
All of which means, the need for a national economic reform program is now greater than ever. The need for a government with the guts to prosecute such a program is now greater than ever and the need for a government prepared to prosecute a reform program, helping households to cope on the way through is now greater than ever.
In a nutshell, these were the reasons which we are argue that we were elected. Identifying the changes occurring around Australia, prosecuting an argument that the liberal government had failed after 12 years to do anything of substance to prepare Australia to meet these choppy seas brought about by the changes unfolding around us. And thirdly to embark upon a program of national economic and related reform in order to see this nation through.
My argument is simple; there is absolutely no point in being elected to government for the sake of being in government.
For the sake of being there, for the Peter Sellars school of public administration, for the “I like to watch” school of public administration, if you remember the movie Being There. The Liberals' standard operating procedure for more than a decade.
Fine for a global boom, an absolute failure in preparing for after the boom is over. Opportunities squandered rather than opportunities seized. We by contras intend to get on with it.
In our first six months we have laid the foundations, honouring our election commitments by brining down a responsible Budget, by commissioning the relevant policy reviews. This to be followed by two and a half years of intensive reform; tax; welfare; regulation; skills; infrastructure; innovation; health, housing; closing the gap with indigenous Australia; climate change and water.
It was for this reason that we argue that we were elected and it is for this reason that we intend to govern. And with that it gives me enormous pleasure to launch Christine Jackman's book on the 2007 election campaign.
This has been a work, and labour of some intensity over a long period of time. I have known Christine from back in her Brisbane days. This has required a lot of effort, a lot of interviews, a lot of work. And I congratulate her on her professionalism.
I have not read every page of this book, though the index search done by Lachlan basically stopped when he realised that his mentions in the book were of such a limited scope. But I can say that in terms of documenting the events, the tumultuous events of the year 2007 this has been a significant effort on Christine's behalf and it gives me great pleasure to launch this book.
Congratulations Christine.


It's a great pleasure to be back home in Nambour.
And it's a great pleasure to be here at the QUOTA Memorial Park with the Wall of Remembrance.
We are here to celebrate the 90th anniversary of the Nambour RSL.
It is, I am told, probably the oldest RSL in existence.
A reminder of how even this little corner of Australia 90 years ago was so affected by war.
And how the community then came together and formed an organisation for returned soldiers.
If the war touched Nambour, it shook Australia greatly.
Over 400,000 Australian enlisted.
Over 300,000 served overseas.
Over 60,000 died.
And this was out of a population of only four million.
It was an extraordinary sacrifice for a country so young.
And one that we must surely remember.
So congratulations to all Nambour RSL members for laying the foundation for the RSL tradition and keeping it going for so long.
Today, to celebrate the 90th anniversary we are here to dedicate this Wall of Remembrance.
The RSL has worked hard to with the local community to commemorate all those men and women from Nambour and the surrounding area who have served with our armed forces.
There are already 280 names on the wall.
They are the names of men and women that have been a part of the great traditions established by the ANZACs.
The traditions of dedication to duty and proud service in the name of their country.
There is no higher calling than to wear the uniform of this country.
And on this wall is the name of people that have answered that calling.
I am proud that my father's name is there on the wall.
He served with the 2/15th Australian Field Company of Royal Australian Engineers.
He served in the Middle East, back in Australia and in the South West Pacific.
After the war, he came here  -  to Nambour.
And I am still proud to call myself a Nambour boy.
I want to thank the Nambour RSL, QUOTA International and the local community for coming together on this project.
Honouring those who have served is part of who we are as Australians.
It is right to honour them.
Because they served to protect us.
They have protected Australia and have stood for what we believe in.
The stories that our fathers, brothers, sisters and mothers tell us about their experiences are the story of our nation.
Like the stories of the battles in the South West Pacific in 1941 and 1942 when we fighting for the future of this great country.
Australia, with our ally the United States, was fighting for its survival.
Armies manoeuvred, fleets sailed and air forces roamed the skies.
But these military units were all made up of individuals with stories to tell.
People from Nambour and countless other towns around Australia.
People whose stories we should hold dear.
The Memorial Wall will help make sure that our memories do not fade.
The Next Generation
But we need to do more than that to keep the memories alive.
We have to make sure that the stories are passed on to younger generations.
And we hope and pray that it will not be necessary to add the names of future generations to the list of those who gave their lives in war.
I want to thank all the young people here today who are taking part in this event.
The Suncoast Christian College Choir ...
The ADF cadets ...
And the students from Burnside High School, Nambour Christian College, Nambour High School, St John's College and Suncoast Christian College.
I see the values of ANZAC running deep in the veins of young Australians.
So I am confident that the memory of those who have served and the memory of their deeds will live on.
They will live on and will remain a part of the fabric of who and what we are.
Gallipoli, Tobruk, the Kokoda Track and the modern day theatres of the Middle East are an important part of the story of our nation.
Young men and women continue to serve with distinction with our forces at home and overseas.
They follow in the tradition of ANZAC and they build on its name.
Whether as peacekeepers, combat troops or working in any one of a number of support roles, our troops do us proud.
Today we also recognise the role played by the families of those who served.
When they serve, soldiers need the support of families and friends back home.
And when they return home they also need support.
They need the support of their families and they need the support of the wider community.
The RSL does a great job in this.
It helps people make the transition back to civilian life.
And it helps veterans stay in touch with one another  -  to maintain the ties that were often forged under fire.
So today I would like to congratulate the RSL not only for building the Wall of Remembrance, but for its work over the past 90 years in supporting veterans.
I want to congratulate QUOTA International on the initiative it took more than 10 years ago to establish the Memorial Park.
This event and this memorial are a fitting and dignified tribute to the members of the RSL who have served their nation with distinction.


I would like to start by just reflecting on what extraordinary things you have done and those before you have done. The video presentation just now is a graphic visual reminder of the fact that our Paralympic teams past and present have overcome all odds in order to be there representing Australia. You are a celebration of the possible and I congratulate you for your guts, your determination and your professionalism and your commitment to our countries name.
I would like to start by thanking the President of the Australian Paralympic Committee, Greg Hartung, for inviting me to this announcement of the Australian Paralympic Team. But most importantly I'm here to congratulate the athletes selected to be part of the 2008 team, particularly those that have joined us today.
You are extraordinary Australians and you have done extraordinary things and all Australians are proud of you, all Australians are proud of your achievements in getting to where you have got and all Australians are proud of what you will do in our collective name in Beijing - good on you.
Thank you for making Therese and Kate and I honorary members of your team. We promise not to muck up, well at least Therese and I do.
Therese is particularly honoured to be an unofficial member of your team. Let me tell you a little bit of her story. Her Dad was in a wheelchair. He was an RAAF navigator during the war, his plane crashed and progressively during the 50's and 60's he lost the use of his legs and her entire life memory of her Dad is her Dad in a wheelchair, and he past away only about a decade ago in his mid 70's and he was an extraordinary man.
But here's the connection also, after the war in his period of rehabilitation he was sent to Stoke Mandeville, that hospital in the United Kingdom where the Stoke Mandeville games began. The Stoke Mandeville games then gave birth in large part to the Paralympic movement from 1960 on. And Therese's Dad, John Rein, was there at the original Stoke Mandeville games we are advised - she was not there - in the mid 50's we are advised from the family history, carrying the Australian flag at those games and an archer. He later participated in wheelchair basketball and he later also participated in other sports and was a great encouragement to many people who then became participants in the Paralympic movement.
So for Therese it's a particular honour to be here and she has a huge family connection in terms of the inspiration which her Dad represented in her life as someone who always believed in overcoming the odds. So well done, Therese knows in particular how tough that can be.
Australia has participated in the Paralympic Summer Games since they first commenced in Rome in 1960. Our success has grown from winning 8 medals in the first games to a record achievement of 149 medals in the 2000 Sydney Games.
Since 1996, Australia has been ranked in the top five nations at the Paralympic Games and was one of only two countries to win 100 or more medals at the Athens games in 2004. The stories of their success and many of your successes, as many of you were at Athens, are truly inspirational.
In Athens, the leading medal winner, Chantel Wolfenden, won an incredible six medals in the sport of swimming, closely followed by Prue Watt, who won a total of five medals in swimming as well. We also had great successes on the track, with Tim Sullivan winning gold in all four of his sprint events. These are just a few of the success stories among the Australian Paralympians.
At this year's Paralympic Games in Beijing, Australia will take a total team of 170 athletes and 121 staff  -  our biggest team ever to an “away” Games  -  and I am sure at this Games we will continue to be a dominant force - no pressure.
We will be watching you as you strive towards your goals in Beijing. We Australians love our sport. And we take great pride in those who represent our country in the field of sport. We love to see the action and the competition, and we are motivated by the hard work you put in and the character you demonstrate.
The Government is proud to support you through the Australian Paralympic Committee. The Committee's vision  -  to enable Paralympic athletes to “inspire and excite the world”  -  is one which all Australians share.
The Government recognises the importance of encouraging Australians to participate in sport  -  for the personal and social reward that it brings and to bring about also a healthier country, a healthier community.
We are keen to enhance recognition and support for disabled athletes. It is important that we improve pathways into elite sport for athletes with a disability and improve participation more broadly. Your own efforts are particularly important in helping us to achieve this. You are role models, all Australians, all Australians are watching you as role models and it is a great role model that you provide us all.
You are about to represent Australia at these games and this is itself as I said before an extraordinary achievement. Not too many people get to reach this level of excellence and compete against the best in the world their chosen sport.
The example you set goes an enormous way to motivating other Australians to get active, participate in sport and be the absolute best they can. You are role models, not only as sports men and women, but also as extraordinary people. You challenge us to dream big and to keep striving towards our goals despite the obstacles that we may run into in life.
Your efforts inspire our country. Of course there is still more to do  -  when the Games themselves actually begin. And I'm sure our Chinese friends are looking forward to that day which comes very soon and I look forward very much to being there among them at the time when those games lift off.
You will have a lot of support from your coaches and trainers, your family and friends. And don't forget that you have this whole nation of Australia behind you. And yes, we're going to be watching.
The 2008 Paralympic Games will be broadcast into every household in Australia, with over 100 hours of live and highlight coverage shown through the ABC. I thank the ABC for their commitment and for their support.
Also I hope that you thoroughly enjoy your time in Beijing, it's a great city. Therese and I have lived their ourselves for a few years, it's a fantastic place. You'll find many, many really interesting things to do apart from your actual participation in the games themselves. It's an ancient land, an ancient capital and a wonderful people.
And I would like to thank all the coaches, trainers, and other staff who support our athletes. Your dedication and professionalism is appreciated. On behalf of all Australians, I would like to wish all those participating in these the 13th Paralympic Summer Games the greatest of success.
Australia will be watching, Australia will be cheering, and Australia will be proud of you one and all.


I'm honoured to present the inaugural Tom Burns Memorial Lecture, an event that from today will become a fixed part of the Queensland political calendar.
Tom Burns was a great Queenslander.
Tom Burns was a great Australian.
Tom Burns was a great Australian internationalist.
Tom Burns was in all these things a proud son of the Australian Labor Party and the great Australian labour movement. 
His contribution to the cause of Labor stretches back to the 1950s.
Despite that, he was a man who always grasped the future.
Before his time, he understood the potential of Asia for Australia's economic future.
Before his time, he understood the importance of reform if the Labor Party was to win government.
He understood too that political life is a marathon, not a sprint. And so he worked tirelessly, year after year, holding the party together through some of its darkest hours.
Always pointing the way forward.
Forward to government  -  after 23 years in the wilderness federally, and after 32 years in the wilderness here in Queensland.
Forward to a better future both for working families and for the nation.
When the Don Dunstan Foundation invited me to give an inaugural Tom Burns Memorial Lecture, I was a little surprised.
You could hardly imagine more different personalities.
Don Dunstan was an urbane, cultured South Australian. A man most at home watching the opera in the Adelaide Festival Centre  -  performing his poetry readings; Australia's very own renaissance man.
Tom Burns was an in-your-face, colourful Queensland larrikin from central casting, a man who embodied Australian mateship; most at home in his boat on Moreton Bay, a fishing line in the water, pelicans overhead and wearing a very attractive pair of stubbies.
In terms of sartorial splendour, both displayed a passion for shorts  -  Don, his hot pants; Burnsey, what could be described as Queensland formal attire.
What they have in common is that they were outstanding Labor leaders of their time.
Both were men of vision  -  deeply committed to the Labor cause of fairness and reform. 
They were friends, too  -  indeed just two days after Tom had become party leader in December 1974, when the ALP representation in the Queensland parliament was reduced from 33 to 11  -  the cricket team that is now the stuff of legend - Dunstan got on the phone and told him he was coming up to Brisbane to help him with the enormous challenge he'd just taken on.
That's when the Queensland Party began to professionalise its operations.
Both were also colourful, larger-than-life personalities  -  never afraid of causing offence, and yet well liked by political friends and foes.
They were leaders who have left a deep imprint on political life, long after they had departed the stage.
This memorial lecture is a very appropriate way in which to remember Tom  -  as well as a great way to raise funds for Indigenous literacy and homeless youth.
I knew Burnsey for almost 20 years.
He was always an inspiration - a source of advice and encouragement, and sometimes the source of a good clip behind the ears. 
And he brought colour and life into any room he entered.
Like Don Dunstan, Tom had a great sense of mischief.
On his retirement in May 1996, Tom recounted a remarkable story about the day he ended up in a sauna with the infamous Russ Hinze, the Minister for Roads in the Bjelke-Petersen Government.
Tom was asked who he most loved to hate in his political life and he surprised people by answering that it was not Joh Bjelke-Petersen, but big Russ.
Tom explained that though Russ Hinze was a “bloody old crook”, he liked him.
One day, he saw big Russ and complained to him that National Party politicians in government never went to a Labor electorate to give schools a holiday.
Apparently it was the practice for government MPs to go to schools in their electorate and declare a holiday, a sure route to political popularity - at least for the kids, if not the parents!
But kids in Labor electorates never had such good fortune.
So Russ Hinze replied  -  “Do you want me to come?” and Tom said  -  “Yes”. And Russ responded immediately: “Thursday”.
And Russ did exactly as he said - by 11am that Thursday, Tom Burns and Russ Hinze had gone to seven schools in Tom's electorate and shut them all down, declaring holidays.
The two of them thought they were doing quite a good job, so next they began visiting pubs in the area, trying to declare holidays there as well  -  though with less success.
The late afternoon saw Russ Hinze singing the Red Flag in the Colmslie Hotel at Morningside - in my own electorate - and finally, Russ and Tom had their photo taken under the Gabba scoreboard, before retiring to the sauna at the Gabba.
Only Burnsey could have got away with that.
Tom Burns, ahead of his time in understanding Asia
Much can be said about Tom Burns' achievements in his public life, and there are endless stories about how he relentlessly championed the interests of people in the bush throughout his years in opposition and government.
But I want to focus on an aspect of Tom Burns far less well known.
That was his role as one of the first Australian political leaders to embrace the potential of Asia for Australia's future.
Tom was a trailblazer in building Australia's relationship with China.
As Federal President of the Labor Party, he helped lead the first official delegation to the People's Republic of China in 1971, meeting Premier Zhou En-Lai while Gough met Chairman Mao Zedong.
That visit is now the stuff of political history.
But if you place yourself back in the context of Australian politics in 1971, undertaking that trip took real political courage.
There was a clear risk the visit could backfire.
But Tom Burns as President, alongside Gough Whitlam as parliamentary leader and Mick Young as Federal Secretary, took the risk because they had the foresight to realise the role that China could play in Australia's future.
Unsurprisingly, Prime Minister Billy McMahon attacked Labor for taking this delegation, famously remarking that in the Great Hall of the People, Zhou En-Lai had played Mr Whitlam like a fisherman plays a trout.
McMahon's remarks were a not-so-subtle attempt to revive the spectre of communist influence used against Labor in previous two decades - so often, and so effectively.
But this time the scare campaign didn't work.
Instead, it emerged just a couple of days later that Henry Kissinger had secretly visited Zhou En-Lai in Peking, and it was announced that President Nixon would visit Peking soon after.
Labor had showed it was far more in touch with contemporary international developments than the Liberal Government.
And Beijing still recalls that visit as a sign of Australia's friendship and engagement with China.
Tom Burns worked tirelessly to strengthen Australia-China relations forever after the 1971 visit  -  visiting China more than fifty times, with the rare distinction of meeting the four generations of Chinese leaders.
Most recently, he chaired the Queensland China Council forr the Queensland State Government.
His support of Australia's relationship with China was recognised when he became the first Australian not of Chinese heritage to be awarded the prestigious Gold Magnolia Honorary Award from the Shanghai Government for his contribution to Chinese-Australian relations. 
This achievement is all the more remarkable when you think of Tom Burns' background.
He had no university qualifications; he had never been a student of international relations or Asian studies.
And he had come from a State regarded in that era as the most parochial of all the States.
Yet he grasped the significance of China like few others of his time.
Tom was a walking, talking example of experiential learning.
Tom was ahead of his time on the question of China.
He worked hard to build bridges between Australia and China.
He recognised early that China would be of critical importance to Australia in the future.
When China was still an inward-looking nation with little economic power, Tom engaged with China.
He realised that China would play a bigger role in world affairs as time went on.
And, instinctively, he knew that the best choice for everyone was to involve China in the international system.
I think the world has now caught up with Tom's thinking.
A few years ago the American Deputy Secretary of State, Bob Zoellick wrote an article urging China to become what he called “a responsible international stakeholder”.
Zoellick's point was that, as an emerging economic and political power, China had much to gain from supporting the international order.
The Chinese Government, too, has begun to use its own words to talk about similar concepts.
It is talking about how to build an “harmonious world”.
These two ideas  -  “responsible international stakeholder” and “harmonious world”  -  have some similar ideas at their respective cores.
The idea of a “harmonious world” depends on China being a participant in the world and  -  like other nations  -  acting in accordance with the rules of that order.
Working in cooperation with others is what “harmony” is about.
“Responsible stakeholder” contains the same idea  -  China working along side other nations to maintain and develop the global and regional rules-based order.
China's positive engagement with the world is good for China and it is good for the world.
In recent days, we have seen a major setback in Doha.
China however has been playing a constructive role  -  notwithstanding its reservations about its agricultural sector.
When I visit Beijing next week, I will again explore with China's leadership what might be possible to keep the flame of Doha alive.
Multilateral action on trade liberalisation is a major challenge.
Multilateral action with China on climate change is also a major challenge.
The case for global and national action on climate change is clear.
The economic costs of inaction on climate change will be far greater than the cost of action now.
The environmental cost of inaction is stark.
For Australia, the case is clear: We are already the world's hottest and driest inhabited continent.
We therefore will be hit hardest and earliest by climate change, unless we act.
It is vital to our national interests that we act internationally on climate change.
So either we do as the Liberals did for 12 years past and for the future, and bury our heads in the sand.
Or we act.
We say that we have already wasted too much time.
We say that action through a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme is the responsible way ahead.
It will be tough and it will cost  -  but it is the responsible course of action for the future.
Acting in partnership with China will be important  -  with China as the largest coal consumer in the world, and Australia as the largest coal exporting nation  -  Australia and China have a combined responsibility to act on clean coal.
That is why during my visit to China with Senator Wong in April, we announced that the Australian Government will invest $20 million in an Australia  - China Joint Coordination Group on Clean Coal Technology.
Overall, the Government is now investing $95 million in China specific climate change and water programs out to 2015.
During my visit, our two nations also agreed to establish a new Ministerial level dialogue to drive enhanced cooperation in clean energy technologies; climate change science, adaptation, and building the capacity of China to respond to climate change.
And under the Australia - China Climate Change Partnership and the Australia China Environment Development Program, we announced:
     * A feasibility study into the development of the largest solar city in the world at Weihai in the northeast of China.
     * A pilot project applying Australia's National Carbon Accounting System at a provincial level in China, and
     * A trial of the Australian river health monitoring systems in the Yellow river, The Pearl River Basin and the Da Ling River.
Collaboration with China on climate change, on the Doha Development Round as well as the rest of the global multilateral agenda is part of Australia's goals for the future  -  to shape a common future characterised by peace and prosperity for the Asia Pacific century that lies ahead.
Tom Burns, the party reformer
Tom Burns was both an internationalist and a passionate Australian nationalist.
In the same way, Tom Burns championed reform to the Labor Party itself.
He joined the party at the age of 18 in 1949, and spent much of his spare time working for the party during his six years in the RAAF in Victoria, where he trained as a radio mechanic.
In the half century that followed, he served in an extraordinary range of party positions  -  State organiser; State Secretary; State President; Federal President; State Opposition Leader and Deputy Premier.
It's unlikely that anyone will serve such a wide range of roles again.
But, in today's idiom, Burnsey was no party hack or machine man.
He was a flesh-and-blood true believer.
He believed politics wasn't about power for its own sake.
It was about representing ordinary people who otherwise never had a voice in government.
It was about achieving social progress.
They weren't easy days for the Labor Party in Queensland or indeed federally. The roles he played often brought their share of conflict and tough internal challenges. 
One of the highlights of his period of Federal President was Burns was given the tough job of investigating problems in the NSW branch in 1971.
His report was typically blunt, and recommended a comprehensive program of reform.
Alongside Mick Young's reforms to the Victorian branch in 1971, Tom's efforts helped lay a platform for the election of the Whitlam Government in 1972.
The Labor Party that Tom Burns knew was far from perfect, but he gave unending loyalty and commitment.
When he became Queensland Labor Leader in 1974, he inherited a divided party, a poor organisational structure, and just 11 members in the Queensland Parliament.
But Burnsey didn't complain  -  he just got on with the job of rebuilding.
He knew the art of the possible  -  how to push the envelope, without pushing it too far.
He showed great enterprise as Opposition Leader.
To overcome the astonishing lack of resources for an Opposition Leader  -  he was given only two advisers - he went out and established an informal policy advisory network  -  the ‘Bank on Burns' committee, that comprised up to 80 people including academics, Reserve Bank staff and even a few brave state public servants.
As a result, he was able to take a substantive and ambitious 20-point employment plan into the 1977 election, where against a wily Joh Bjelke-Petersen and a gerrymandered electoral system, he more than doubled representation to 23.
In fact, he came near to tripling the party's representation, falling short by less than 300 votes in a further seven seats.
When he felt his time as leader was up in 1978, he gave up the leadership but he didn't walk away from his party. He continued to serve in the parliament for almost twenty years.
What kept him going was his commitment to the Labor Party and the people it represented. Just a few days after the election of the Goss Government in December 1989, he remarked:
“Of course there were times when I felt like giving up during the 17 years I spent on the Opposition benches. 
But then I would go to some little country town where we had no hope, and an old bloke would tell me he had taken the day off to meet me, and would take me to his home for morning tea or lunch. 
You could see they were putting out food they couldn't afford, and that they couldn't really afford to miss a day's work. 
But they would be filled with enthusiasm and pride in the organisation, and I would think: ‘They're not giving up. How can I?' 
They were the people really kept the faith, who never deserted the Labor Party. And I'm not ashamed to say I cried out of pride for them.” (“Tom's tears flow after 32-year wait”, Courier Mail, 10 December 1989)
His role was significant at a national level as well as in Queensland:
     * his was the vote that prevented Gough Whitlam from being expelled from the Labor Party in 1966;
     * he, along with Mick Young, led the successful 1972 It's Time campaign, and
     * he was instrumental in adopting modern campaign techniques.
Our democratic system relies on political parties to generate candidates and policies that address the needs of their times.
Tom was someone who understood that. He had an extraordinary ability to get warring parties into a room and knock good sense into them  -  and I'm sure many in this room could furnish examples of times when he did just that.
Tom's spirit of party reform must continue to guide us as we confront the great reform challenges ahead, and develop new forms of engagement with the Australian community.
And he was always focused on the real purpose of politics and the Labor Party  -  to stand up for the interests of ordinary working people.
Conclusion
Tom Burns got it right on party reform.
He got it right on China.
And he left an inspiring legacy for a new generation to take forward.
Tom Burns brought good humour, colour and passion to a long public life.
Tom Burns is one of the greats in Australian political life and especially in Queensland political life.
I am honoured to be the first to deliver the Tom Burns Memorial Lecture and I'm grateful that like you I was able to call Tom a friend.


I am delighted to welcome you today to this important summit.
I thank the New South Wales Government for their support in assembling the peak leadership of Australia's financial institutions, regulators and representatives.
Before we discuss the substantive agenda for today, I want to make some specific remarks about current financial market conditions.
As we know, the past 12 months have brought volatility and continuing uncertainty on global capital markets.
Australia is an open economy, and since the 1980s we have actively pursued deeper integration with the global economy.
No sector of our economy is more globally integrated than the financial services sector.
As a result, we cannot be immune from global developments.
Australia is strongly placed to see our way through these difficult global financial challenges.
Firstly, we have a strong, well regulated banking sector.
Secondly, our banks' balance sheets are still strong compared against their relevant global counterparts and our banking sector is taking sensible steps by putting in place provisions to respond to difficulties.
From day one, the Government has encouraged banks to disclose their positions and address any problems  -  this is part of the proper, transparent functioning of the financial system.
Thirdly, in general, our corporate balance sheets are strong.
Fourth, in addition to a well-regulated financial sector, we have built a strong surplus  -  one of the largest surpluses in almost a decade by reducing spending as a per cent of GDP to its lowest level in 20 years  -  as a buffer to help withstand the challenges now unfolding.
Fifth, we have a comprehensive program of long term economic reform  -  to build a seamless national economy, a highly skilled workforce, advanced infrastructure, competitive markets and efficient regulation  -  all of which will underpin the competitiveness of the financial services sector.
Sixth, we have taken steps to strength Australia's financial markets. We have moved to expand the issuance of Commonwealth Government Securities by up to $25 billion, to support an efficient bond market and reduce its vulnerability to adverse shocks.
We have also introduced a Financial Claims Scheme, to provide certainty and protection, and we are reviewing the appropriate disclosure requirements for equity derivatives.
Lastly, the Treasurer, the Governor of the Reserve Bank and I have all been working through international forums  -  such as the Financial Stability Forum and the IMF  -  on the crucial issues of liquidity and transparency in the global financial system.
We are working to make sure Australia comes out the other side of these challenges in a strong position compared with other economies.
Before moving back onto the day's agenda I would like to express my disappointment at the recent failure of WTO members to secure a breakthrough in the Doha Round.
At a time of great global economic difficulty, this comes as a body blow to the global economy, and it is a loss of valuable opportunities for Australia.
What we have to do now is get on with the task of where to next  -  and I'll be engaging in discussions with various international leaders in the days ahead about finding a path forward.
     * The Government recognises the enormous export potential of the financial services industry, and is committed to developing policies to establish Australia as a regional financial services hub.
     * Globally, financial services exports are worth more than $150 billion per year. [OECD 2005]
     * Global trade in financial services has been growing faster than in any other services sector, at an average annual rate of 17 per cent this decade [OECD 2007].
     * Australia has a sophisticated financial sector with a track record of innovation and significant recent successes in global markets.
     * Assets under management in Australia exceed $1.1 trillion US dollars, making it the largest funds management industry in Asia and the fourth largest in the world.
Within our neighbouring economies of the Asia-Pacific region, despite the recent volatility, we are seeing the strong underlying trends that will continue to drive growth and provide opportunities for Australia's financial services sector:
     * an increase in the volume and frequency of the movement of capital;
     * a growing middle class, and
     * ageing populations and savings growth, including growth in assets under management.
The Government's overall economic agenda is founded on:
     * responsible economic management;
     * a comprehensive program of economic reform;
     * and intelligently investing in the industries of the future.
And the Government is convinced of the very substantial future potential for Australia's financial services sector  -  both domestically and in regional and global markets.
This is something that I addressed two years ago as Shadow Trade Minister, when I spoke to the Investment and Financial Services Association conference in Brisbane.
And since taking office, we have advanced an agenda across the full spectrum of policies that affect your industry.
     * Tax: we have cut withholding tax rates for established real estate investment trusts to a final rate of 7.5 per cent by 2010-11 (from 30 per cent) - to make it one of the most competitive in the world.
     * Deregulation: We are making progress towards consistent, national regulation of credit products. We are advancing this work through the COAG Business Deregulation and Competition Working Group, as part of our wider reform agenda to build a seamless national economy.
     * Education: We recognise the sector's need for highly skilled and multilingual graduates, and we look forward to continuing discussions with industry on how we build the workforce skills that we need for the future. Already, we have invested $62 million to help give Australian school students the language skills needed to engage with our Asian neighbours.
     * In addition, we are conducting the Bradley Review of Higher Education to examine the responsiveness of the higher education sector in altering the course mix to meet student and employer demands.
Successful expansion into global markets requires a partnership between government and the financial services sector.
One of the most critical ways in which the Government can act is to enable greater access to overseas markets for financial services, which are often subject to significant barriers to entry.
That is why I have hosted financial services industry lunches each of my overseas visits  -  in the United States, in China and in Japan.
I am pleased that we have already achieved some results.
Just over a month ago, Australia secured approval as an investment destination under the Chinese Qualified Domestic Institutional Investor Scheme.
This will open opportunities for Chinese banks to offer investment opportunities in Australia  -  providing access to one of fastest growing markets for funds management in the world.
Chinese funds under management stood at US$451 billion at the end of 2007.
By the end of this year could be as much as US$720 billion.
The Government is also actively pursuing improved access to the Hong Kong market (and indirectly to the mainland Chinese market), by pursuing mutual recognition agreements to help lower barriers for Australian funds managers in the Hong Kong market.
In the US in March earlier this year, I announced with the Chair of the US Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) Chris Cox that we would work together to develop mutual recognition of securities regulation  -  and we hope to be in a position to make an announcement on this in the near future.
And just last month, we brought into force an agreement for mutual recognition of securities offerings between Australia and New Zealand.
Across this range of key initiatives in tax, deregulation, education, infrastructure and overseas market access  -  we're sending the message that Australia is serious about competing as a global financial services provider.
We recognise that there is more work to do.
This Summit is an important next step to chart the path forward.
This is the time to plan ahead for the future of the industry beyond the current global difficulties.
I know that several further important ideas will emerge from today's discussions.
It's important that these ideas don't simply get lost in the bureaucracy.
That's why the Government will also be establishing a dedicated team within the Treasury to take charge of the financial services agenda for the Government.
This team will coordinate the Government's policy actions in this area and be a single point of contact for the sector.
This team will also build on the ongoing work we have been doing across the Government in with industry organisations such as IFSA, the ABA and the Insurance Council, as well as with individual businesses.
This team's first task will be reporting on the outcomes from today's Summit and establishing priority areas for action before the end of the year.
The Government's Financial Sector Advisory Council will be charged with oversight of this team and advising on the Summit's recommendations. 
On one other matter, the Government understands the importance of taxation for the international competitiveness of the financial services sector  -  as with other parts of the Australian economy.
That is why the Government has initiated a root-and-branch review of Australia's tax and transfer system, led by Ken Henry. The taxation issues raised in today's summit will be referred for consideration as part of the Henry Review.
Finally, I want to raise one further matter for your thought and feedback.
We would appreciate your efforts to identify those barriers to overseas market access that most restrict Australia's capacity to expand our financial services exports.
The Government is committed to working with the sector to help overcome those constraints.
And if it will assist our efforts to expand the sector's global opportunities, I would like to prepare to lead a delegation of senior industry leaders to key Asian economies to showcase the strengths and sophistication of Australia's financial services sector.
We want to work to ensure that the financial services sector is an important part of Australia's global branding.
Thank you again for your attendance at today's Summit.
Today's discussions will be an important input into Government policy making.
I look forward to today's outcomes and to your continued input as we work together in building an industry that has an important role to play in building and sustaining Australia's prosperity.


I'm delighted to be here tonight in support of the Oaktree Foundation.
It has been terrific to watch Oaktree grow from just a seedling, five years ago, to its current shape  -  with branches spreading across the country.
I remember my introduction to Oaktree when a young man named Hugh Evans came bounding through the door of my office in Parliament House.
He didn't just want to talk about the weather  -  or show me his new medal as Young Australian of the Year.
Instead, Hugh wanted to talk about poverty.
He wanted to talk about injustice.
And, most impressive of all, Hugh didn't just want to talk about it, he wanted to explain to me how he was going to fix all of this.
It has been wonderful to watch Oaktree grow in the years since then.
Tonight I'd like to focus on the role that Oaktree and other organisations in the third sector can play in our efforts to tackle poverty.
Challenging economic conditions
But first I would like to address the immediate challenge of the difficult global economic conditions now being confronted by Australians and by our region.
Australia like other nations faces tough economic times ahead because of the state of the global economy.
That is why the Government is building a stronger Australia through responsible economic management to put downward pressure on inflation and as a result, on interest rates.
And it is why we have a major economic reform agenda to strengthen our long term competitiveness and build the industries of the future.
Industrialised nations are facing some of the most uncertain economic conditions in the past two decades, with soaring energy and food prices, combined the uncertainty in global credit markets.
Australia is not immune to the impact of these developments  -  and we have the added complexity of inheriting the highest inflation rate in 16 years.
As a result of slower global growth, tighter credit conditions and higher interest rates, economic growth is expected to moderate to 2.75% in 2008-09.
This is expected to lead to a moderation in employment growth and to gradually reduce inflation.
The Budget forecasts that employment growth is expected to moderate from 2.5 percent in 2007-08 to 1.25 per cent in 2008-09.
The Budget also forecasts that unemployment is expected to rise from 4.2 percent currently to 4.75 per cent by June 2009.
With the global turmoil buffeting all economies, the Government's responsibility is to chart a responsible course ahead.
The Government is acting responsibly to meet the short and long term challenges of rising inflation and a slowing global economy.
In the short term we are monitoring unfolding developments to ensure that we strike the right economic balance for the conditions we face:
     * We struck the right fiscal balance in the Budget.
     * We provided a $55bn support package to Australians doing it tough including $47bn in tax cuts.
     * And we built a responsible Budget surplus of $22bn to give us a buffer for the future.
For the long term, we are prosecuting an economic reform agenda based on:
     * Enhancing long term productivity growth by investing in education, skills and training, led by an $11 billion Education Investment Fund.
     * Investing in our future infrastructure needs, led by a $20 billion Building Australia Fund.
     * Taking practical action to lift workforce participation over time.
     * The most comprehensive review of the tax and retirement incomes systems in the last half century.
A strong economy for the long term is fundamental for Australia's ability to support working Australians at home, as well as to be generous in our international assistance efforts.
The Make Poverty History campaign and Oaktree
The difficult global economic conditions will of course have a particularly acute impact on many of the world's poorest nations  -  who are particularly vulnerable to soaring commodity and food prices.
That makes the work of Oaktree and the Make Poverty History alliance even more important. 
I had the honour of attending one of the first Oaktree Vision Nights at Carey Grammar, not long after meeting Hugh Evans in Parliament House.
The sheer passion of the team was remarkable.
They understood:
     * That a world in which half the human population lives on less than $2 per day, is not fair, and not tolerable.
     * That we cannot put up with 30,000 children every day dying of preventable illnesses.
     * And that quite small amounts of money for people in a wealthy nation like ours, can have big impacts for people in the world's poorest nations.
The extremes of global poverty make for heavy reading  -  but what has always struck me about people in Oaktree is their refusal to engage in a counsel of despair. 
They want to take responsibility.
To act. To lend a hand to those who really need it.
To inspire young Australians to believe that they can make a difference. And to act on that belief.
And with a passion to mobilise young Australians to work together and bring new hope to people in the developing world.
Oaktree has now branched out into every state on the mainland, building links, I understand, to over 200 schools and mobilising more than 15,000 supporters.
It is an outstanding example of the fantastic youth movements that have risen up in Australia in recent years  -  like Oxfam's youth movement, Vision Generation at World Vision, the church-based Micah Challenge  -  all part of the wider Make Poverty History coalition.
Oaktree's achievements in just five years have been substantial  -  from the Schools for Schools program building partnerships between schools in Australia and the developing word, to the creative and eye-catching campaigns to lift awareness of the fight to end extreme poverty.
I was delighted to support Oaktree and the Make Poverty History concert in Melbourne in 2006.
I am told that somewhere there's even footage of me dancing to the Hilltop Hoods that night.
The good news is, that is not up for auction tonight.
I was pleased also to join the concert for the Make Poverty History Zero Seven Road Trip at the Sydney Opera House last year.
That was where I made the announcement that in government, Labor will lift Australia's overseas development assistance to 0.5 per cent of Gross National Income by 2015.
Australia's aid commitment
We will honour that commitment  -  and in this year's Budget, we made our first step, raising development assistance by $505 million to a total of $3.7 billion for 2008-09.
As one of the nations that signed on to the Millennium Development Goals in 2000, Australia accepts our responsibility to help make those goals a reality.
Those eight goals are the shared development priorities for the international community.
They include halving extreme poverty by 2015 and achieving universal primary education by 2015.
Australia has a very special responsibility to help nations in our immediate region.
The success of economic development is critical to the long term security of our region.
But progress among the Pacific island countries towards the Millennium Development Goals has been mixed at best.
That is why Pacific island countries are a major focus of our development assistance program.
They are in our neighbourhood, and Australia wants to be a good neighbour.
We know that they face some real challenges.
Some countries have gone backwards against some of the key goals.
It is clear that we need a new approach to assisting these countries build a sustainable future.
That is why, in March when I visited Port Moresby, I issued the Port Moresby Declaration.
That Declaration was a commitment by the Australian Government to building long-term relationships with the countries of the Pacific  -  relationships built on mutual respect, mutual responsibility and mutual cooperation.
Our next step is to work together with Pacific island countries to forge our Pacific Partnerships for Development.
Under these partnerships, we will agree on joint development goals with Pacific island countries.
And we will jointly monitor progress towards the goals.
If the goals are achieved, we will be prepared to offer more assistance.
The partnerships will be tailored to the circumstances of each country, reflecting their particular challenges.
Some of the greatest challenges are faced by the smallest island states  -  many of whose survival is threatened by the impact of climate change.
I intend to advance our plans for the Pacific Partnerships for Development later this month when I visit Niue  -  one of the smallest Pacific island states  -  to attend the annual Pacific Islands Forum Leaders' Meeting.
Already, Australia has announced a $150 million program to assist countries in our region to tackle the impacts of climate change.
In addition, through AusAID we will be funding two new positions for youth ambassadors to help us in the fight against climate change.
AusAID has now begun advertising these two positions.
One will be an Environment and Climate Change Officer with the United Nations Industrial Development Organisation in Beijing.
Their job will be to coordinate the implementation of the UN-China Climate Change Partnership Framework.
The other will be a Climate Change Research Officer with the United National Development Programme Regional Centre in Bangkok.
I would encourage any young people interested in climate change to put their hands up for these positions.
I can also announce tonight that AusAID has just agreed to provide funding for four Australian Development Research Awards to undertake climate change related research in our region.
More than three quarters of a million dollars will be allocated for research into renewable energy and better management of forests.
Deforestation is a critical element in climate change, accounting for around 20 per cent of global carbon emissions.
These awards will fund research on how to combat illegal timber trades, and on economic incentives and governance measures to reduce the contribution of tropical deforestation to climate change.
Australia will also continue to promote the concerns of small island states at risk from climate change.
Last month in my remarks at the G8 Outreach Summit in Japan, I sought to put the spotlight on how climate change threatens their very future.
Australia will also continue to press for the interests of these tiny states at the negotiating table for the global climate change deal that is so important to the interests of the world's poorest people.
The Third Sector
In forging partnerships to tackle the challenges of development and climate change, it is critical that governments work more closely with the non-government sector, or third sector.
But we also recognise that the non-government sector has a critical role to play.
The third sector is often more effective at mobilising support, harnessing the energy of volunteers and developing innovative approaches to entrenched problems at home and overseas.
That is why the Government is committed to strengthening its partnerships with the third sector  -  because there's things you can do, that we can't.
But equally, the third sector must have the support of government.
Governments have a responsibility to exercise compassion and care for people who need help.
And governments alone can provide the big investments needed to address entrenched disadvantage, whether in Australia or overseas.
What we need  -  to tackle huge challenges like extreme global poverty, Indigenous disadvantage and homelessness  -  is to bring together the vitality of the third sector with the resources of government.
In our overseas development assistance, AusAID will continue to build on its relationships with develop assistance organisations.
Oaktree is an outstanding example of the vigour, imagination and leadership in Australia's third sector.
Its efforts add to the enormous contribution that is made by Australia's leading development aid organisations - including World Vision, CARE Australia, Oxfam and Caritas.
Oaktree has also made an important contribution to the Make Poverty History alliance, that has done such an important job in raising the profile of the Millennium Development Goals and the pathway to end extreme poverty.
A new era of philanthropy
Another very positive recent development is World Vision's initiative to establish the Business for Millennium Development organisation.
This highlights the scope for the corporate sector to play a far stronger role in Australia's contribution to development assistance.
This is where most of us here tonight come in.
The Australian people are generous about reaching into their own pockets to help out those in need.
In fact, OECD data indicates that Australians are the world's second most generous private donors to non-government aid organisations.
That is remarkable tribute to the community spirit of Australians, who understand that our responsibility to look after one another does not end at our borders.
But we can still do better.
The third sector cannot achieve its potential without the financial support of the corporate sector and wealthy individuals  -  just think of the global impact of Bill Gates and Warren Buffett and their inspirational generosity.
Research for the Australian Centre for Philanthropy and Non-Profit Studies earlier this year indicated that the giving of Australia's most affluent people has not even kept pace with their rising incomes in the past decade.
Other evidence suggests that Australia's affluent are only giving a little more than average Australians, and are giving at a lower level than their counterparts in comparable countries such as the UK, Canada and the US.
Simply put, our corporate sector and more affluent Australians can do a better job in contributing to the third sector.
That is why the Government is currently considering the scope of a reform agenda for the third sector.
Philanthropic organisations play an important role in combating social exclusion and enhancing the economic, social, cultural and environmental wellbeing of society. 
The role and importance of such groups will be examined by both the comprehensive review of Australia's tax system and the Productivity Commission review of the contribution by the not for profit sector.
The Government can also do better  -  in fact our generosity lags well behind most wealthy nations, with Australia ranked 15th out of 22 nations for our aid commitment.
We have some great examples of prominent Australians who have made enormous contributions to the wider Australian community through supporting charitable activities.
But we can do more.
Conclusion
In the meantime, I would like to congratulate all of the supporters of the Oaktree Foundation from the business sector that are here tonight.
We all know that tackling poverty and disadvantage is a long-term challenge.
If aid strategies are to be effective, they also need to be long term.
That's why Oaktree needs a secure long-term foundation  -  both in terms of its future leadership and its financial base.
Oaktree is already making the transition from its ageing founder, Hugh Evans - who turned 25 in March - to a new young leadership team  -  led by David Toovey, Tom O'Connor, Rachel Hart, Erin Sciola and Brooke Fowles, and supported by the Oaktree volunteers who are at your tables tonight.
It is also important for Oaktree to have a secure financial foundation  -  so that it can make long term funding commitments to its key programs.
And that's why we're all here tonight.
Tonight is a very important opportunity to establish a sound footing for Oaktree's future.
So tonight, it gives me very great pleasure to officially launch the Oaktree Future Fund.


I welcome the opportunity to return to Consilium tonight - I'm told for the sixth time.
And I look forward to returning in the future.
Because I welcome all substantive contributions to Australia's policy debates.
I don't think that think tanks should find themselves in or out of favour simply because of a change of government.
Policy ideas should be evaluated on their merits, not by their letterhead.
Australia is facing some complex, long term challenges  -  challenges that go to the heart of Australia's prosperity and security in the changing world of the 21st century.
These challenges don't have easy solutions.
If we're going to tackle them successfully, we must have thoughtful, robust debate and exchange of ideas.
As we saw at the 2020 Summit in April, Australians are genuinely interested in new ideas for our future  -  and I thank Greg Lindsay and others here today for their participation.
Australians today are not much interested in the old battlelines of yesterday's ideological wars.
Watching the traditional Right and Left of politics in today's policy debates sometimes reminds you of seeing your kid trying to put on last year's jumper only to realise it no longer fits.
The old Right and Left thinking is often an ideological straitjacket.
The solutions to today's challenges  -  on productivity growth, on welfare reform, on Indigenous policy, on workforce participation and on climate change  -  won't come out of conventional Right or Left paradigms.
The solutions will come from people willing to challenge the false choices of the old paradigms that said that our only options are heavy-handed regulation or unrestrained market forces.
We simply don't have to choose between Hayek and Brezhnev.
The Australian Government sees itself as being at the reforming centre of Australian politics.
We believe unapologetically in the power of market forces as the most efficient and effective means of generating economic prosperity.
Just as we also believe in the public goods that constitute the pre-conditions for a market economy to perform efficiently and effectively.
We also recognise that markets fail.
As a matter of general principle we believe in using market mechanisms and incentives to design innovative approaches to these long-term challenges.
We also believe in a compassionate society that endeavours to pick up those who have fallen down, and help them back on to their feet. Not through the episodic acts of private philanthropic endeavour, but through the actions of society through the State.
Always, however, with an open mind as to the agency through which a compassionate society should act.
That is why we explicitly reject Hayek's view that society has no obligation to others who are unknown to us  -  and Hayek's preparedness to allow fundamental social institutions like the family to fend entirely for themselves against unrestrained market forces.
That is why for example we have a different approach to industrial relations, because we believe families need certain fundamental protections in the workplace.
This broadly is the philosophical framework we bring to government  -  again what we would describe as the reforming centre of Australian politics  -  recognising the power of markets, but recognising equally the limitations of markets.
Consider for example climate change  -  perhaps the greatest market failure in history.
Yet we believe a market mechanism  -  emissions trading - is the best way to find the lowest cost and most efficient route to cutting carbon emissions.
Consider also how micro-finance has proved so effective in developing nations in our region. Even very small amounts of financial capital have been effective in helping millions of people to start a business and start the climb out of poverty and despair.
The most productive intellectual and policy debates today often lie at the intersection between market failures and market mechanisms.
And the challenges of policy innovation and solving complex problems today often arise from the nuts and bolts questions like how we design markets:
     * that harness the innovative potential of market incentives
     * that operate transparently with informed and empowered consumers, and
     * that are supported by the most appropriate provision of public goods.
...while intervening where necessary when markets fail.
The Government's priorities
Tonight I would like to discuss our long-term priorities for government.
Australia like other nations faces tough economic times ahead because of the state of the global economy.
That is why the Government is building a stronger, fairer, and more secure Australia to help meet the needs of families and to see Australia through.
The Government also has a plan to tackle the long term challenges we face for the future.
Our first responsibility is the nation's security.
The Government prioritises the defence and security of our nation, its people and their interests through:
     * building a strong defence force;
     * shaping the regional and global environment in ways consistent with Australia's national security, and
     * planning for long-term energy security.
Second, the Government is committing to building a stronger Australia for the future through:
     * responsible economic management to put downward pressure on inflation and therefore on interest rates, and
     * a major economic reform agenda to strengthen our long term competitiveness - the heart of which is how we build long term productivity growth through an education revolution, and an ambitious program of business deregulation and tax reform.
Third, the Government is committed to building a fairer Australia that:
     * delivers a balanced, fair and flexible industrial relations system;
     * helps working families, pensioners and carers with cost of living pressures, and
     * endeavours to bring all Australians into the mainstream of Australian economic and social life  -  including action on closing the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.
Fourth, the Government is committed to preparing Australia for the great global and domestic challenges of the 21st century, through:
     * a responsible and comprehensive plan of national action on climate change;
     * securing our long-term water supplies, both the Murray-Darling and our urban water systems;
     * reforming the national health care system so that it can cope with the demands of an ageing population, and
     * working internationally to build a more secure and prosperous world for the 21st century by seizing opportunities for creative middle power diplomacy.
And fifth, the Government believes in practising a new way of governing that is more transparent, more accountable, and more open to contributions from the whole community  -  an approach reflected in:
     * the 2020 Summit;
     * the introduction of regular community cabinets throughout Australia;
     * an increased engagement with the ‘Third Sector' of not-for-profits, community organisations, corporate philanthropy and volunteerism, and
     * reforms to Freedom of Information and processes of making government appointments.  
Australia's economic challenges 
The Government has embarked on this comprehensive reform strategy for the nation at a time when we are facing the worst global economic conditions in almost twenty years.
The global economy is now 12 months into a global financial crisis with real consequences for global and Australian economic growth.
The crisis in global credit markets has been complicated by what is now the third great global oil shock, alongside soaring world commodity and food prices.
This means that inflation is on the march globally, while the impact of the credit crisis continues to unfold around the world.
These are challenging conditions.
Australia's economic outlook is further complicated by the domestic economic circumstances inherited by the Government: inflation at a 16 year high, resulting in 10 interest rate rises in a row; and the second highest real interest rates in the industrialised world.
Those constraints were not simply the product of the mining boom in Australia. 
They also reflect the fact that Australia had not seen adequate levels of investment in education and training in recent years.
Nor had we planned sufficiently for our future infrastructure needs, or sustained the progress on microeconomic reform that was achieved in the 1990s.
Our challenge for the future is to turn around the disappointing productivity performance that we've seen in the current decade, with productivity averaging 1 per cent in the current cycle compared to 3 per cent in the mid-1990s.
Achieving higher productivity growth over the longer term will help us to reduce inflation and therefore reduce nominal interest rates, as well allowing us to achieve faster growth.
The Government's economic reform program
These challenging conditions underscore the urgent need for responsible economic management and a substantive new national economic reform program in Australia.
The Government took a disciplined approach to the Budget.
We brought government spending down to its lowest level as a share of GDP since 1989, and built a strong Budget surplus of $22 billion  -  one of the largest in a decade and an effective buffer for the future.
The Government also established a $40 billion long term investment framework for infrastructure, education and health care reform  -  through a $20 billion Building Australia Fund, an $11 billion Education Investment Fund and $10 billion Health and Hospitals Fund.
We did not wait for economic conditions to turn against us before developing our major agenda for economic reform.
In fact, long before the global financial crisis and from the Opposition benches, we began laying out an activist approach to microeconomic reform.
In January last year I released a detailed policy paper outlining the urgent case for an education revolution to lift long-term productivity growth.
The education revolution has now begun  -  with measures including early childhood education for 4 year olds, trades training centres and computers in schools, targeted investment in university maths and sciences, and a sweeping review of higher education.
Further, for the first time, Australia now has the capacity to begin planning for our long term infrastructure needs through Infrastructure Australia.
And with the $20 billion Building Australia Fund, and the forthcoming guidelines for Public Private Partnerships, we have the capacity to begin to deliver on those plans.
The Government is also driving forward its plan to build a seamless national economy, tackling 27 areas of Commonwealth/State regulations through the COAG business deregulation process.
The Government is preparing for the impact of an ageing population by focusing on long term measures to increase workforce participation, including substantial measures to make childcare more affordable and accessible.
We are also committed to assisting Australian businesses in preparing for an increasingly competitive global economy, by building a culture of business innovation. Later this month we will receive the Cutler review of innovation policy.
The Government has begun to embark upon the most comprehensive microeconomic reform program that Australia has since the early 1990s. It is a substantial program, because serious microeconomic reform has been so long neglected.
This work is long overdue, and critical to the long term competitiveness and productivity of the Australian economy.
A new agenda for a fairer Australia
A strong economy allows us to deliver opportunities and improved living standards for all Australians.
A strong economy also allows us to builder a fairer Australia.
The fair go is a fundamental Australian value  -  and it is a fundamental part of the Government's vision for Australia's future.
The Government believes in building a fairer Australia by abolishing Work Choices, by helping Australian families, pensioners and carers in practical ways make ends meet as well as offering a helping hand to the most disadvantaged.
That is why the Government has also begun tackling entrenched disadvantage:
     * to close the gap in Indigenous life opportunities;
     * to tackle the long term causes of homelessness, and
     * to build a broader framework for social inclusion of all Australians.
While our commitment to fairness reflects an enduring Labor value, the Government is open minded in how we go about improving opportunities for the neediest people in our community.
We are conscious that in several areas, traditional approaches have not worked  -  and we need to innovate if we are to be successful in creating a fairer Australia.
New Approaches to Indigenous Policy
Nowhere is there a clearer need for new partnerships and policy innovation than in Indigenous policy.
The problems that we are fighting today have been generations in the making. 
A decades-long social decline paralysed by violence, neglect, despair and the breakdown of families and communities. 
It is the legacy of successive governments' failures. 
This didn't happen overnight and it can't be fixed overnight.
But closing the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians must be a national priority.  It is a major piece of unfinished business facing the nation.
We have set targets across the core areas of health, education and employment to focus our efforts:
     * Over the next decade, halving the gap in infant mortality rates. 
     * In the same time frame, halving the gap in reading, writing and numeracy for children.
     * Over the next generation, closing the 17 year gap in life expectancy. 
     * And halving the gap in Indigenous employment outcomes within a decade.
Meeting these targets will not be easy.
Government cannot do this alone.
Nor can it be done without the Government.
It requires a plan, with responsibilities shared between local Indigenous leadership, governments, business and third sector organisations.
We are now working through how best to translate our closing the gap targets into community level development plans.
There is no national one-size fits all solution.
The Government's core role to provide the basic building blocks in communities  -  investments in education, health and housing infrastructure and advice on governance and service development  -  delivered in partnership with others.
These new local partnerships to close the gap must marshal all the resources and expertise in each community.  We must have a three-way partnership at the local level involving:
     * government leadership and investment in provision of infrastructure and basic services;
     * Indigenous Australians taking individual and community responsibility for their actions and their futures, and
     * the active engagement of the business community to help build a lasting foundation for employment and progress.
One of the great missed opportunities of past Indigenous policies has been that we haven't effectively harnessed the potential contribution of the business community.
Even so, recent years have seen some valuable individual initiatives:
     * The four major banks are partnering with the Aboriginal employment strategy in Sydney to place hundreds of Indigenous high school students in traineeships.
     * The National Australia Bank is also partnering with the Traditional Credit Union to provide access to community credit facilities in the Northern Territory.
     * Mining and resource companies are training and recruiting disadvantaged Indigenous job seekers from the Pilbara to the Gulf of Carpentaria.
     * The Australian Indigenous Education Foundation is using corporate and philanthropic investment to fund boarding scholarships at leading private schools for young Indigenous Australians.
     * The AFL, the NRL, cricket and netball leagues are bringing sport to Indigenous communities and create new education pathways.
     * Macquarie and other corporates are financing the Song Room project, to bring music and the arts to children in disadvantaged communities.
These are all outstanding examples where the business community is improving the opportunities for people in Indigenous communities.
This is a clear repudiation of the statist model that says only the Government can solve our major challenges.
Of course governments have unique roles and responsibilities.
But governments do not have the power to rebuild families and communities that have broken down.
What we must aim for, in our Indigenous community partnerships, is to provide all the necessary support and assistance  -  but ultimately, to empower Indigenous Australians to take responsibility for their futures.
The corporate sector has a very important role to play in these partnerships.
I'm pleased to announce tonight that the Government will support Andrew Forrest in his ground-breaking initiative, the Australian Employment Covenant. 
Andrew plans to rally employers all around Australia and have them commit to providing opportunities for 50,000 Indigenous Australians to step out of welfare and step up to permanent full time paying jobs.
Just as the Government has set bold set of targets to close the gap, Andrew is going to ask Australian businesses to be similarly bold.
Under Andrew's plan, all Indigenous Australians who want to work will be encouraged to opt out of the welfare system.
Those who decide to take this first step can then enrol in a short intensive training course that will get them ready for on-the-job training with a participating employer.
Participating employers agree through the Australian Employment Covenant to employ a certain number of Indigenous people qualified to the training-ready level.
The Government's part of the bargain is to help bridge the training-ready gap.
The Government will match this commitment with appropriate pre employment training.
Andrew Forrest and his steering committee  -  including Noel Pearson, Warren Mundine and Rod Eddington - will be encouraging every Australian employer to join them in tackling Indigenous unemployment in a way that only the private sector can  -  with real jobs. 
I welcome this imaginative and ambitious plan and I look forward to supporting this initiative.
Conclusion
From the day we came to government, we had to make a choice between two paths for Australia's future.
Would we take the easy path of business as usual  -  hoping that the good times of recent years would just roll on? Would we just hope, as yesterday's neglected challenges became today crises, that something else would just turn up and get us off the hook?
Or would we take the harder path and take on the big challenges  -  putting the long term interests of Australia ahead of short-term politics?
We are determined to take the latter path.
We know that will often make things tougher for the Government.
But it's why we're here.
Not power for its own sake, but to prepare Australia for the challenges of a new century  -  a century in which the Anglosphere that dominated the past two hundred years is unlikely to remain in ascendance.
An activist Government like ours is good news for a think tank like the CIS. I think we'll be doing a good deal to keep you in business.
I very much look forward to the CIS's continued contributions to the policy debates that lie ahead.


Thank you very much Vice Chancellor Ian Chubb. To the Chancellor elect of the Australian National University Kim Beazley, good to have you here again Kim at my old university. To Mrs Mary Bull it's an honour to have you with us and to members of your family because Hedley for those of us who never knew him personally is just an outstanding name in the disciplines of international relations and strategic studies. 
To the various other representatives of the university, to Bob McMullen my parliamentary colleague and Parliamentary Secretary for International Development Assistance and Michael L'Estrange the Secretary of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade.
Members of the Defence Force, Members of the Diplomatic core and dare I say it most importantly you the students and scholars of the future because in your hands more than you probably estimate lies the future. How we shape this discussion this debate about international relations, about strategic studies, very much impacts the reality. And those engaged in the academic pursuit of these disciplines never ever underestimate your impact on what the practitioners then take from that and how you shape the reality out there in Australia's engagement with the world.
I have a prepared speech from which I will now depart.
Can I say something about Hedley Bull who I never met. But if there was an Olympic Games in international relations and in strategic studies Hedley Bull would be without doubt a gold medallist, an absolute gold medallist.
This is an extraordinary contribution from the extraordinary scholar. If you travel the world Hedley Bull's name is known across these core disciplines and we should honour him proudly as one of our own, as an Australian born and bred, as a product in large part of this university. But most importantly as Australia's gift to the scholarship of the world in these critical disciplines.
A pre-eminent scholar, a pre-eminent Australian and a pre-eminent contributor to the important discipline of international relations.
If I could address my remarks in just two or three ways.
The first is as I've looked at the description of how you propose to do things here Vice Chancellor, I think it's a very good thing. Namely this is by its very definition an interdisciplinary centre, you are bringing together the disciplines.
And let me step back a bit in terms of why I think that is a good thing. If you look at the emergence of the academic discipline of international relations which goes back to the end of the First World War, E. H. Carr and the rest. And the legitimate emergence of international relations theory and strategic studies as separate academic pursuits. This was a good thing because it brought focus and attention and analysis and data to what is a critical element of scholarship and policy.
In the period since the last War and most particularly in the last decade or two, something different has been emerging. Now what the international relations scholars would describe as the collapse of the great divide namely between that which is exclusively international relations and that which is, let's call it, intrinsically national matters.
The collapse of the divide between the foreign and the domestic, the internal, the external, the international and the national. That's called globalisation and it is happening a pace and complexity which affects not just those of us who are practitioners in public policy but its happening at a pace and level of complexity which also affects how the academy organises itself.
Which brings me back to I think the great achievement which is reflected in this Hedley Bull Centre. And that is your bringing together the great disciplines of international relations, of strategic studies, of defence studies, of diplomatic studies in history. Also of political science and also of social change. Because guess what the reality which we practitioners, I speak here as someone who use to work in the Department of Foreign Affairs when I used to have a real job back then, constantly deal with which is this highly interrelated reality.
There's not just this box of things over there called strategic studies, a box of things over here called diplomacy, a box of things over here called international economics and a box of things over here called domestic politics and social change. We are dealing with a constant interrelated nature of the above.
And where I think this centre has a great potential contribution to make to the scholarship of the world and certainly a contribution to public policy making in Australia is doing it here. Because you have the strategic studies, strategic and defence studies centre, the department of international relations, the department of political and social change and the Asia Pacific school of diplomacy all contributing to the combined efforts of this centre.
That is a very good thing because it actually reflects the reality which those of us who are practitioners, political and diplomatic level, have to deal with.
The second point I'd make flows directly from the first and that is that the critical role which specialists in these fields have to play in providing advice to Government.
If there is an inherent spark of genius in the idea of the Australian National University, and the imaginings of the likes of Chifley and Curtin way back when which gave birth to this university not long after the Second World War. it was in locating an Australian National University here is Canberra which would provide a ready platform for advice and engagement with those of us who are public policy practitioners.
Whether its economics, whether it's in social policy but most critically given the concentration of our international diplomatic efforts in the area of foreign policy and security policy. Therefore it is a doubly good thing that the Hedley Bull centre is here. It is a doubly good thing that it is here at the heart of the Australian National University because from our point of view the challenge for the future in having a fully engaged academic faculty with not just tens but I hope hundreds of scholars engaged right across the breadth of our international engagements is of fundamental importance. And it is a good thing that you now have a place, an integrated place to call home.
The third thing I would say is this, right now we are engaged in great challenges in terms of how we shape and reshape the international order. The Australian Government has launched a debate about the future shape of the Asia Pacific region.
We put forward an idea for an Asia Pacific Community by 2020 and that is a debate which will unfold and ebb and flow over the years ahead. But I am simply of the view that unless we begin to initiate debate about the future shape of our region, the future institutional shape of our region, then the alternative is simply drift into another future. I'd much rather that we in this country were actively engaged in debate about what the future shape of our region should look like and that very much lies at the heart of our proposal for an Asia Pacific Community.
Another proposal we have out forward out there where we would again invite the contributions of this institution is our proposal embodied in the combined establishment of an international commission on non proliferation and disarmament.
This area of work of course was something which lay near and dear to Hedley's heart if I look at the work he undertook in the British Foreign Office in the mid-sixties when he headed the office, I recall, of Arms Control and Disarmament in the FCO 65, 67 or thereabouts. I apologise Mrs Bull if I have got those dates slightly wrong but thereabouts.
And that 40 years later remains completely unfinished business. This is a complex and difficult area of work in strategic studies, arms control and disarmament and international relations.
The reason we have put forward the idea of an international commission is because we need to provide a public vehicle for engendering a genuine international debate among politicians and with specialists on how we actually breathe life back into the non proliferation and disarmament agenda.
If we look around the world today over the last decade this is very much a debate which has drifted into the sand. Yet we look around the world at the same time we continue to see the evidence of nuclear weapons proliferation. This is a challenge for us all.
It is a complex challenge, it is difficult, we fully are ceased of that, but that should not be an excuse for inertia. It should instead be an encouragement to action.
So this international commission which will be co-charred by the effervescent Gareth Evans, always like phosphorus on water our Gareth, will be up and out there engendering new friends and occasional frictions in the international community as we seek to push this agenda forward.
But it is a necessary agenda and I say about this what I just said about the debate on the Asia Pacific Community.
It is a far better thing for Australia and the world that we are intelligently debating these propositions about how to shape the world's future and our regions future and its institutional dimensions then simply sitting back and waiting for events to unfold.
That is not in my nature, it is not in the nature of this Government and is certainly not evidenced in our decision to establish an international commission which will be co-chaired by Gareth Evans. And also importantly supported in my most recent discussions in Tokyo with the Government of Japan.
Therefore to conclude my remarks where I began which is the future role of this Centre.
I can think of no better place from which the ideas that will shape our country's future in our engagement with the world could be developed from than this great Hedley Bull Centre.
You have remarkable opportunities here, the world literally lies at your feet. There is a great tradition of scholarship in this institution and you now have great facilities to support it.
Some years ago I was an undergraduate here, studying just over the road there at the faculty of Asian studies. And occasionally would lurch into the doors of the Coombs Building to speak with eminent scholars and that's how I would run into the likes of Des Ball and I'd run into the likes of Ross Babbage and others. And in fact spent some time studying part time here in the 1980's, in the Strategic and Defence Studies Centre before lurching off into Queensland and steadily working my way into the political sphere.
But this institution from my personal experience of it and these institutions which in part form the Hedley Bull Centre are great institutions. Those of you who are part of them should be proud of them. They have done great things in the past. I am confident that they will do great things in the future.
And with those remarks it gives me enormous pleasure to declare open this Hedley Bull Centre.


It is a great pleasure to be in Korea and to be here among friends.
Our two countries might be separated by separated by geography, but we have a lot in common.
We are both outward looking countries.
We rely for our prosperity on a stable and fair global trading order.
We are both allies of the United States.
And we are both countries committed to middle power diplomacy.
That means we work closely with our partners around the world to shape the international environment.
We have a strong history of working together in particular on regional initiatives.
And we are close economic partners  -  a relationship that brings enormous benefits to both sides.
Tonight I would like to talk about how I view our relationship and how much scope I see there is scope to develop it.
Because  -  as many people recognise  -  the development of the strength and diversity of our political ties has too often failed to keep pace with the development of our economic ties.
I am determined that the Australian Government that I lead will change that trend.
We want to build on the strong economic base of our relationship.
We want to expand our security and political connections.
And we want to work together more closely on the big challenges we all face.
We are committed to building a stronger, broader relationship with Korea  -  a relationship that reflects the extent of our shared interests, our shared values and our shared goals.
Korea
Part of the reason I want to do this is because I think that a closer relationship is in the interest of both countries.
For Australia, becoming more engaged with Korea's remarkable economy can only be a positive move.
The Republic of Korea turns 60 this week.
I know that “Korea” as a distinct nation on this peninsula has been around for thousands of years.
But it was only 60 years ago that the Republic of Korea was born out of the end of the Second World War.
It was not an easy birth.
In less than two years time, the Republic of Korea was fighting for its very survival in the face of an attack from its northern neighbour.
The war was brutal and tragic.
It pitted brother against brother.
When the war ended with the armistice three years later, Korea was in a terrible state.
Years of conflict had destroyed infrastructure and left people in poverty.
It is that starting point that makes Korea's economic transformation over the next decades so remarkable.
From the 1960s, Korea transformed itself into a global economic force.
Korean brands have come to dominate markets around the world.
Korean ingenuity and innovation is widely recognised.
And this was all achieved by the hard work of the Korean people and the economic policy choices of the Korean Government.
There have been setbacks on the way  -  including the Asian financial crisis in 1997.
But Korea has always proved itself to be resilient.
So I would like to pay tribute to the people of Korea, and Korea's business sector, for all that has been achieved in the space of 40 or so years.
The New Australian Government
Like Korea, the new Australian Government is committed to economic growth.
We understand that countries need the right domestic economic policies if they want to remain competitive.
We also understand that the best future for our people lies in engagement with the world.
The new Australian Government's domestic economic reform agenda is broad.
We are investing in education and infrastructure so that we have the best workforce we can and that businesses have the physical infrastructure they need to innovate.
We are also working to deregulate and build a seamless national economy.
Australia is a federation that spans a continent.
It is crucial that businesses in Sydney and Perth do not face different rules as they cross state borders.
The other side of our economic development policies is global engagement.
We welcome foreign investment in Australia.
Our process for considering foreign investment is straightforward and provides certainty to investors.
We work with our economic partners around the globe to keep pushing open the door to economic exchanges.
I was very disappointed two weeks ago when the Doha Round of trade liberalisation talks broke down in Geneva.
Pushing forward on global free trade is a key aim for this government.
And, at a time when the global economy is facing pressures from rising oil prices, rising food prices and a global credit crisis, a good outcome from the trade talks would have been a real boost.
It would have sent a strong signal to the business community that governments are still committed to the idea of freer global trade.
And the talks in Geneva made huge progress  -  we should not lose sight of this fact. 
Nor should we give up hope, because the outstanding issues remain capable of resolution.
We have to think about how we now move forward.
There are three steps we should take.
First, lock in what we've achieved by recording the progress we've made.
Secondly, resolving the remaining areas of difference.
And thirdly, looking to seize next available window of political opportunity.
We have to keep pushing to get an outcome from all the work that has been done, because trade has played such an important part in global economic growth in recent decades,
It is simply too important for us to give up.
Australia-Korea economic relations
Despite the set back in Geneva, I am still confident that the economic relationship between Australia and Korea can continue to grow.
Our economic relationship is very important for Australia.
It is also, I believe, very important for Korea.
Our economic ties have been the bedrock of our relationship for decades now  -  since the first shipment of iron ore arrived here in the late 1960s.
Resources continue to form the foundation of our trade.
Korea is a major export destination for Australian uranium.
The coal and iron ore that Australia exports to Korea is of benefit to both countries  -  it is an export for us and a critical input in the manufacturing chain for Korea.
My Government is keen for that relationship to continue.
We would also like to see it expand.
Australia has a long and proud history as a stable and reliable supplier of LNG.
A relationship between Australian suppliers and Korean consumers of LNG would be another mutually beneficial strand in our relationship.
What is noticeable about recent years, is the expansion of the economic relationship.
We now have a very strong service component to the relationship.
Education is an important part of that.
Around 35,000 Korean students were enrolled in Australian educational institutions last year.
In addition to these students, we have close to 30,000 young Koreans visiting Australia on “Working Holiday” visas. 
More young Koreans come to Australia under this program than from any other country.
And today I witnessed an e-lecture between Yonsei University and the Australian National University (my own university)  -  it is an example of the expanding education links we have.
Our financial sector cooperation is also growing.
Now, the Macquarie Group of companies, Korea, is a major presence in Korea.
The Group has invested around $20 billion in Korean assets as of March 2008.
In doing so, it delivers good returns for Korean, Australian and international investors.
Australian performing arts is a growing new service export sector for Australia in Korea. 
Partnering with Korea's dynamic and influential entertainment sector offers real opportunities for Australia.
Korean audiences welcome foreign performers here in Korea.
Australian groups and individuals are performing almost every week in Korea.
Groups and individuals such as “End of Fashion”, “Tony Emanuel”, “Saritah” are making a big impact on the performing arts scene in Korea.
We have also seen increasing ties between our high-technology sectors.
I visited a clinic today to see the work of Koreans surgeon providing children with cochlear implants  -  better known as the bionic ear, a technology that was first developed in Australia 30 years ago.
The Cochlear success in Korea is not an isolated example of our high technology trade in the health sector with Korea.
Hospira Corporation's Australian operation supplies $1 million of injectable pharmaceuticals to the same hospital I visited this morning.
In manufacturing too there are more and more ties between Australia and Korea.
Just look at the automotive sector.
The global supply chains of General Motors means that GM Holden of Australia is supplying 100,000 automotive engines to power passenger vehicles manufactured in their Korean factory.
Also, the Holden “Caprice” vehicle fully made in Australia will soon be on the road in Korea as a luxury car in the GM Daewoo range.
The economic and trade relationship is strong and it is growing.
But I think we should be looking for ways to push it to an even higher level.
The recent non-government study into the feasibility of a free trade agreement between our two countries showed remarkable potential.
It showed that a free trade agreement could boost Korea's and Australia's GDPs by more than 20 billion US dollars each over the next 12 years.
I am very keen for our governments to look very closely at the question of an FTA.
I think we would have a lot to gain from one.
And today I was pleased that President Lee and I agreed that our two governments would begin pre-negotiation consultations on a free trade agreement.
Regional Cooperation
One important element of our economic ties is that we share many common ideas about how to ensure that our region is one that supports economic development.
For nearly 20 years now, since APEC was launched, our two countries have been strong supporters of developing our regional organisations.
APEC is still the main economic body for the region.
It has done good work in encouraging more open trade and investment between member economies.
It has helped to ensure that our region remains open and inclusive.
As beneficiaries of globalisation, I think that both Australia and Korea are of the same view that cutting ourselves off from the world of seeking to develop exclusive economic blocs is not in anyone's interest.
We agree that lowering barriers to economic activity is the right thing to do.
We agree that we should be trying to increase the links between countries, not erect barriers between them.
Today I was pleased to have the chance to talk with President Lee about the future shape of our region.
The region we live in now is very different to the one at the time when APEC came into being.
Cast your minds back to 1989.
Only one year earlier, Seoul had hosted the Olympic Games.
China's economy was growing, but was still relatively small.
Japan seemed likely to overtake the United States as the world's biggest economy.
The Soviet Union was collapsing.
Korea's evolution to a full democracy was close, but still incomplete.
India was inward looking and not engaged with the global economy.
We now face a very different region  -  the economic landscape has shifted dramatically.
In the past 20 years, the challenges we face as a region have also changed.
At the top of the agenda now are climate change, terrorism and financial instability.
Our existing regional institutions are playing an important and constructive role in promoting stability, cooperation and prosperity in our region.
But I believe that we should start thinking about what we want our region to look like in 2020 and what regional organisations we might need.
I want to start a dialogue around the region about this question.
It is time we began to think about where we want to get to as a region.
If we do not, we leave ourselves that the mercy of events.
For Australia, having other countries like Korea support this dialogue is of crucial importance.
Over the coming months I hope that Korean leaders, officials, academics and business people can join in this discussion about where we want our region to be.
More than economics
An important part of this discussion will need to be about matters other than economics.
In 2020, we will need a regional mechanism that can bring nations together to tackle the challenges we will face.
That means we will need a body that can discuss more than economics.
We will need a body that can also discuss security problems.
Australia and Korea both want a stable region  -  a view that is, of course, shared by many around the region.
The question is, how do we achieve that?
The answer is that we need a body that brings together all of the major powers in a forum that can discuss any challenges that might arise.
In a region with changing power relativities, it is crucial that we have such a mechanism.
So, part of the discussion I want to have around the region is about how we bring security matters into the scope of our regional bodies.
Taking our relationship forward
Regional cooperation is just one area where I believe Australia and Korea can work more closely together.
In fact, I think we can work more closely together on a whole range of areas bilaterally, regionally and globally.
As two middle powers, as two democracies and as two Asia Pacific nations, we should be looking more at what we can do to work together on the big challenges we face.
For instance on climate change I think we can look to do more together.
Korea is a major consumer of Australian resources  -  a trade that brings benefits to both sides.
But questions of energy and climate change are intimately linked.
As major energy partners, we should look to how we can work more closely together on climate change.
On the big security questions, too, we can do more together.
I announced earlier this year that Australia was going to establish an International Commission on Nuclear Non-proliferation and Disarmament.
I look forward to Korea playing a role in the work of the Commission.
Because I believe that the threat of nuclear weapons is still real, but that the political momentum to solve that problem has faded in recent years.
It is precisely the sort of work that middle powers can do  -  bringing together countries with a shared goal and building a global consensus on how to tackle a major challenge.
But just as importantly, I think we can do more in our bilateral  relationship.
Strengthening our bilateral cooperation would better reflect the shared interests we have.
For instance, Australia and Korea share a keen interest in the resolution of the North Korean nuclear question.
We do not face the threat of the North Korean army the way South Korea does.
But we have important interests in this region.
Three of Australia's top five export markets are in North Asia (Japan, China and Korea).
Anything that could lead to instability on the Korean Peninsula and in the surrounding region is of great concern to Australia.
It is for this reason that Australia has long supported resolution of the North Korean nuclear problem and we continue to do so.
We also continue to provide humanitarian assistance to North Korea.
The shared interests we have in questions of security are often under appreciated.
The historical military links between us are strong  -  over 17,000 Australian soldiers, sailors and airmen served in the Korean War.
And 339 lost their lives.
We have worked together in peacekeeping operations  -  including in East Timor.
And as allies of the United States, we have much in common.
I was pleased that today President Lee and I agreed that we should look at how to bring the different strands of our security cooperation together under a new mechanism.
I am keen to see our security relationship strengthened and a formal security cooperation arrangement would help to do that.
There is enormous potential for closer cooperation in the education area.
I was very pleased to be able to witness today the signing of a new agreement between Australia and Korea to encourage greater education and research links at all levels in Australia.
I want to encourage more Australian institutions to build links with their Korean counterparts.
Strong education links can help to build the people-to-people ties and boost understanding of each other's countries.
But other sectors also have an important role to play here.
The Australia Korea Foundation was established in Australia to promote the broadening of the relationship.
The Foundation was established in 1992.
Its goal is to promote links between different sectors in Australia and Korea.
It runs a business internship program and a young leaders exchange program.
And it funds research linkages projects.
It works hard to add depth and breadth to the ties between us.
It is my great pleasure to announce tonight that the Australian Government has appointed a new Board for the Foundation, including a new Chairman.
David Palmer is a former Managing Director of the Australian Meat and Livestock Association.
He has had a long involvement with Korea and brings great business experience to the role.
He is joined on the board by other business, academic and artistic figures who are all committed to expanding and deepening Australia's relationship with Korea.
They share the commitment of the Australian Government to doing more with Korea.
My thinking on building education and other people-to-people links is simple  -  I believe that Australia needs to be the most Asia-literate country in the collective West.
It is in our interest to do so.
We share a region and a time zone with a diverse region.
To make the most of the opportunities that come our way  -  particularly in the services sector  -  we need people that can span the gap between us.
We need people that can understand and be comfortable with the languages and cultures of the countries of our region.
To do that, we need to give young people the chance to experience life in other countries in our region, and we need more education links to achieve that.
Conclusion 
Today President Lee and I talked about the relationship between our countries.
We talked about the history and about the relationship we have today.
But most importantly, we talked about the potential we see in the relationship.
As two new governments, we have committed ourselves to take some real, concrete steps to realising the potential of the relationship.
I would like to thank the Korean and Australian businesses that have done so much to build our relationship in recent decades.
And I would like to ask for your assistance as we seek to take this relationship to a higher level.
A level that more properly reflect the interests we share and the ties we have between us.
Thank you.


LEE: We've had a very good discussion on a wide range of issues and reaffirmed our commitment to step up cooperation between our two countries.
While both Singapore and Australia have been blessed with peace in recent decades, our relationship goes back to the Second World War when Australian troops were deployed in Singapore with other Commonwealth forces.
That chapter of our history is preserved at the Kranji War Cemetery which Prime Minister Rudd visited first thing this morning before dawn.
When Singapore gained independence in 1965 Australia was quick to recognise us the very next day. Since then we've built close ties rooted in a deep and strategic relationship. Our geographic circumstances and priorities are not identical. Australia's interests encompass the South Pacific where it has shouldered responsibilities for fostering and periodically restoring peace and stability, while Singapore is a part of ASEAN and tracks more closely developments in South East Asia.
Nevertheless our relationship is underpinned by our broadly similar strategic outlooks and many mutual interests. We both uphold an open globalised system that promotes economic interdependence between countries. We both see the vital importance of the United States to the Asia Pacific. We are both convinced that a peaceful emergence of China and India is positive for the region and for the world. We both want a stable and open region, which embraces Australia and New Zealand as part of the broader Asian family.
Furthermore both societies are direct, pragmatic and informal in spirit and in tone which makes it easy for us to understand each other and get along together.
This convergence of interests and ethos sets the overall tone for our bilateral relationship. Our ties have developed steadily and become institutionalised and during through successive changes of leaders on both sides our cooperation is robust and substantial spanning diverse areas.
One key pillar of our cooperation is in defence. The MOU on defence cooperation which we have just signed underscores our strong and multifaceted defence ties. We have been partners in the five power defence arrangements since 1971 and our armed forces have a well established working relationship honed through many joint exercises and training courses.
The Singapore armed forces trains regularly in facilities like the Shoalwater bay training area and the Oakley aviation centre in Queensland as well as the RAAF base Pearce in Western Australia.
We owe many thanks to the Australian Government and people for these generous arrangements. This year the (inaudible) will be deploying a medical team to support the Australian Defence forces in Oruzgan province in Afghanistan.
I'm confident that the MOU we have just signed will help us to strengthen further our defence interactions and cooperation.
In the economic field our bilateral trade has flourished, particularly since the implementation of the Singapore-Australia free trade agreement in July 2003. Last year Singapore was Australia's fifth largest trading partner. We are both open economies committed to promoting trade, investments and bigger stakes in one another's success.
For example the interior design project for Changi airports new terminal 3 was lead by Australian architectural and design firm Woodhead, working alongside a Singapore partner. We look forward to more such collaborations between our companies as well as deepening and broadening of the free trade agreement in future reviews.
Our people to people ties through tourism, cultural and educational linkages are warm and friendly. More than 10,000 Australians live in Singapore, adding to the vibrancy of our city. The Australian School here is full and expanding, in fact the Prime Minister just opened a new building today.
Similarly tens of thousands of Singaporeans live and work in Australia, while an even larger number have received their tertiary education there. In our early years of development many of our students studied in Australia on Colombo plan scholarships. Today we have four Cabinet Ministers, quite a few members of Parliament and numerous senior civil servants who are alumni of Australian Universities.
Singapore has since graduated from the Colombo plan to our regret, but many Singaporean youths continue to pursue their studies in Australia. On our part we hope to see more Australians come to study in our educational institutions, because such ties form a vital bridge between our countries.
On the political front Singapore and Australia cooperate closely in regional forums such as the ASEAN regional forum, the East Asia Summit and APEC. Singapore has always supported Australia's active engagement within the region. We appreciate Australia's contributions including your quick and generous response to humanitarian relief efforts after the Boxing Day tsunami and cyclone nargis.
These are clear demonstrations of Australia's commitment to the region, as your linkages with East Asia grow we hope you will work closely with us in Singapore and our ASEAN partners to shape the evolving architecture of regional cooperation and in particular we look forward to Australia's appointment of its Ambassador to ASEAN and to the speedy conclusion of the ASEAN- Australia- New Zealand Free Trade Agreement which will strengthen Australia's economic linkages with South East Asia.
Prime Minister Rudd Singapore is glad to have in Australia a close friend and a strategic partner. Over the years we have nurtured diverse and solid ties through regular exchanges between our leaders and officials at all levels. I am happy to work with you and your team to build in this long tradition. Recently Deputy Prime Minister Julia Gillard visited Singapore and we look forward to welcoming your Ministers for the upcoming Singapore-Australia joint Ministerial committee meeting.
Our meetings are characterised by the candour of our exchanges and the ease of which we relate to each other. Even when we hold different views on issues we always try to work through them together in good faith, bearing in mind our shared longer term interests and perspectives.
Distinguished guests, excellencies, ladies and gentlemen may I now invite you to rise and join me in a toast to the good health and success of Prime Minister Kevin Rudd, the peace and prosperity of Australia and the enduring friendship between our two countries and peoples.
HOST: Ladies and gentlemen the Honourable Kevin Rudd, Prime Minister of Australia
PM: Thank you very much Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong, distinguished members of the Cabinet of the Government of Singapore and Distinguished representatives of the Government of Singapore, Ladies and Gentlemen.
When Australian Prime Ministers visit Singapore they feel instantaneously that they are among friends and so it is today. If I could, Prime Minister thank you very much for the personal hospitality you have extended to myself and my delegation during our visit here to Singapore today. It is regarded by us as a continuing reflection of the warmth and sentiment which has existed in this relationship for many, many decades and many, many decades to come.
The Prime Minister rightly pointed to the stage in history when this relationship was formed. The days of 1941 and early 1942 were dark days for both our peoples and visiting Kranji as I did this morning before dawn and seeing the graves of thousands of Australians and also to be reminded that there also lies thousands of graves of British servicemen, there lie also even more graves and more memorials in the names of Indian servicemen. This was an extraordinary contribution from across the world in the defence of this island in a very difficult time.
In the hearts and minds of Australians therefore when we think of Singapore, our first thoughts go to those dark and terrible times. So many families in Australia today still bear the scars of those losses. Of course that common endeavour in the field of defence and security has continued in the decades since then. We work closely with each other since Singapore became its own independent republic.
The Prime Minister has also referred to the five power defence agreement, an arrangement which we continue to place confidence, an arrangement which we continue to support. We regard that arrangement as important in terms of the interests of our respective countries. Important in terms of the wider stability, strategically of South East Asia and we will be continuing our support for that arrangement into the future.
But beyond the formal requirements of the five power defence arrangement there is also the fact that our armed forces on a daily basis are engaged in practical forms of cooperation in so many different ways. In Australia at Royal Australian Air Force Base Pearce and Oakley in Queensland and elsewhere.
But also as the Prime Minister also indicated the fact the our friends from the Singaporean armed forces will soon be with us in support of our troops in Afghanistan through the deployment of their medical team. This again is a sign of, not just the friendship between our two countries, but a sign that our armed forces are comfortable in their work with each other in theatres across the world and we look forward to receiving them soon in Tarin Kowt.
Defence is one strong pillar of this relationship but it is not the only pillar. The second pillar lies of course in the strong economic and business ties which have developed now over many, many decades. I met with many representatives of the Australian Business Community this morning over breakfast and none of them Prime Minister told me that they weren't earning a dollar. They always have problems to raise such is the nature of business representation to representatives of their Government.
But in this state of Singapore they have found a comfortable and welcoming business environment in which to operate for which I thank you. It is for many of them a platform to which they conduct their wider business operations across South East Asia and beyond.
Our business relationship has been augmented by the conclusion of the free trade agreement between our two countries. That free trade agreement will continue to be subject to review and refinement over time. But it has provided a strong and solid foundation for the economic and business ties which have developed over the years and will continue to develop into the future. The good thing also about the Singapore-Australia business relationship is that it is not narrowly based, it is broadly based and we intend through our combined bilateral efforts and the efforts of our business communities in both countries to add fabric and depth and breadth to this relationship because it is important for both of our economies.
A third pillar in this relationship lies in the connections which have built up over a long period of time between our educational institutions. I met again with the representative of James Cook University here in Singapore this morning. James Cook will be running a campus soon in Singapore for some 3500 students. But beyond that particular initiative there are as the Prime Minister indicated literally thousands and tens of thousands of Singaporean students whom we have welcome in Australia over many decades to come and live among us, to study among us, to return to Singapore and to form important human bridges of understanding and concrete business relationships between our two countries and two economies.
Prime Minister you said that Singapore had graduated from the Colombo plan and I was speaking about the Colombo plan this morning with your Minister for Transport and Second Minister for Foreign Affairs Raymond Lim who was himself nostalgic about his own education in Australia at the University of Adelaide through being a Colombo plan scholar.
I think in some creative way we need to revisit how we expand our cooperation again through tertiary educational opportunities for young people across South East Asia and beyond. And the Government of Australia will be devoting keen attention to this challenge in the days, weeks and months ahead.
The human bridges and professional bridges which the Colombo plan formed between Australia and Singapore and between Australia and so many other countries in South East Asia in fact rich, profound and one which continues I believe to yield enormous lasting benefits to our two countries and our two communities. I think it's a lesson from which we should continue to learn into the future.
Prime Minister you also mentioned a fourth pillar in our relationship which is our common endeavours in working to build the architecture of this the South East Asian region and wider Asia Pacific region.
As I said to the Prime Minister this morning some around the world have from time to time criticised ASEAN for being insufficiently active or activist. I have never supported that criticism for the simple reason that I regard ASEAN as one of the extraordinary successes in international relations.
The fact that the South East Asia of 40 years ago is so radically different to the South East Asia of 2007-2008 is itself a remarkable achievement. The fact that here in South East Asia we now have a real sense of community, a real sense of security cooperation, a real sense of continuing political dialogue within one another to solve problems through diplomacy rather than by other means, a real sense of emerging economic community. And in that respect ASEAN has been in our view in Australia and on the part of the new Australian Government an extraordinary success.
Part of that success and a key engine room of that success has been the effective diplomacy of Singapore itself and Prime Minister I would pay public tribute to your own contribution in that respect and to that of your predecessors Goh Chok Tong as well as your father Lee Kuan Yew. These achievements in terms of regional cooperation in South East Asia are owed in no small measure to the effective and successful diplomacy of Singapore over a long period of time.
We also have new regional institutions which have emerged including the East Asia Summit in which Australia is also now a participant. The Prime Minister and I will work closely together in how we shape the future agenda of the summit together and in cooperation with other parties to those summit arrangements.
It's important that again across wider East Asia we inculcate the culture of cooperation. The habits of cooperation often do not come naturally. Institutions which encourage cooperation are to therefore of themselves to be supported. That's why we will work closely with Singapore in the future evolution of this important institution, the East Asian Summit.
More broadly again we have next year the opportunity for Singapore to host APEC. When that meeting occurs here in Singapore at the end of next year APEC will have reached its 20th year. It will be important for us all to continue to contribute to APEC's agenda as a forum for wider Asia Pacific Cooperation across the new great powers of this our East Asian Hemisphere and of course the continuing great power that is the United States. Again the habits of cooperation are to be encouraged and are to be supported.
We also look forward to the admission soon across the country to the Asia Pacific region by our special envoy Dick Woolcott the former diplomatic representative in this part of the world. An Australian diplomat of great standing Mr Woolcott will be engaged in wider dialogue with our friends across the Asia Pacific region on the possibility of the long term evolution of an Asia Pacific Community. And we look forward to the contributions of all regional governments including that of Singapore to that proposal
Mr Prime Minister it has been a great honour for me to be invited to this extraordinary residence here in Singapore today and I thank you very much again for the hospitality which you have shown to me and to members of my delegation.
I extended to the Prime Minister early today an invitation to visit Australia again. I said to him, he is always a welcome guest in Australia and we look forward to seeing him in Australia very, very soon. I think sir you will know and know from experience in our country you will always be made to feel welcome because there as here we feel that we are among friends.
In conclusion if I could on behalf of all of those present, now propose a toast to the President and to the people of Singapore.
To the President and the people of Singapore. I thank you very much.


When I arrived in Singapore this morning, the first place I visited was the Kranji War Cemetery.
There is no more permanent reminder of the connection between Australia and Singapore than that sacred place.
More than 2,500 Australians are buried at Kranji or are remembered on the Singapore Memorial to the Missing.
These brave Australians do not lie alone.
Together with the Australians are honoured many thousands of others, including at Kranji some 2700 British, 670 Indians and many others who gave their lives also for the defence of this island.
And those that survived the battle of Singapore then had to go on and endure horror and hardship as prisoners of war.
I thank the Government of Singapore for continuing to honour their memory.
And it is for these great reasons that Singapore has always occupied a special place in the hearts of Australians.
For Australians, military ties with Singapore are not just a matter of distant history.
They have been alive through the Emergency, through Konfrontasi, and more recently through the Five Power Defence Arrangements.
And they continue to inform the present as well as shape the future.
Most recently, our defence forces have worked together in East Timor.
And they will soon be working together in Tarin Kowt in Afghanistan.
Time after time, we also find ourselves side by side in military operations, in peacekeeping operations and in humanitarian operations  -  as in the aftermath of the 2004 tsunami.
Security, defence and peacekeeping cooperation has been a fundamental, continuing part of our relationship.
Part of a wider relationship between our two countries which I believe is welcomed by both our governments.
It is, therefore, a great pleasure to be back in Singapore.
And I want to thank the Government of Singapore for extending to me the honour of giving the Singapore Lecture.
My purpose in this lecture is to outline our thinking on the possible shape of our region in the future in a rapidly changing world.
And, furthermore, how we might together respond to the new challenges that these changes will create if we are to maximise our common goals of security, prosperity and sustainability for the wider region.
All the more important at the dawn of what will become the Asia-Pacific century  -  as the centre of geo-strategic and geo-economic gravity progressively shifts to this our own region.
With this shift comes great responsibility.
A responsibility to ensure that this century of Asia and the Pacific remains truly pacific as previous centuries of Europe and the Atlantic have not.
The changes and the challenges we face are therefore great indeed.
The Transnational Scope of the Challenge
Dealing with the challenges of a more integrated world means understanding both the limitations of the state and the limitations of markets  -  and embracing cooperative solutions to global challenges.
Challenges which lie beyond the reach of any single nation state  -  however powerful.
For example, climate change is the consequence of the failure of free markets to adequately account for pollution externalities.
Similarly, the recent international financial turbulence was precipitated by too little effective regulation, not too much.
The gathering challenges of energy, water and food security reveal the need for long-term management of these critical global resources  -  recognising price realities as a product of scarcity while equally recognising macro challenges of energy and water shortages and their impact on adequate food supply.
And one of the major security threats of the 21st century thus far  -  terrorism  -  has revealed itself to be diffuse, elusive and no respecter of national boundaries and largely immune to the polarised geopolitics of the Cold War era.
We can say confidently that none of the major contemporary global challenges can be addressed by a retreat into isolationism or unilateralism.
Today's global challenges therefore derive from a diverse mix of market failures, ineffective regulation, and inadequate international institutional frameworks to deal with what most of us would regard as genuinely global public goods.
The Drivers of Global Change
The world is experiencing rapid change of an order of magnitude rarely experienced in human history.
These changes are complex.
These changes are greatly interconnected  -  defying the capacity of the traditional silos of public sector policy formulation to deal effectively with them.
These changes are also, in the main, global and therefore tend to defy exclusively national responses.
These changes thus demand that every nation review and renew their national objectives, their participation in regional and global institutions, and their place in a dynamic world.
And nowhere is the pace of change greater than in the Asia Pacific region.
Indisputable demographic and economic change dictates that we are entering the Asia Pacific century.
It is estimated that by 2020, Asia will account for around 45 per cent of global GDP, one third of global trade and nearly one quarter of global military spending.
Our region's population is continuing to grow and is projected to reach 4.6 billion by 2020 out of a total global population of 7.7 billion.
Rapid population growth, combined with rapid urbanisation, will place increasing pressure on resources, particularly in relation to energy.
Asia's energy consumption could grow by around 40 per cent by 2020, or to put it another way, more than half of the increase in global energy consumption by 2020 will come from Asia.
The rise of China and India is a significant part of this shifting pattern of global economic and strategic weight toward the Asia-Pacific region.
This rise will be among the key defining developments of the 21st century.
The rise of China in particular represents the great unfolding drama of this new century.
Will China democratise?
How will China respond to climate change?
How will China deal with crises in the global economic and financial systems?
How will China respond domestically to the global information revolution?
And how will Chinese culture adjust to the array of global influences now washing across its shores directly and through the agency of the greater Chinese diaspora?
How China responds to these forces will radically shape the future course of our country.
Which means how countries such as Singapore and Australia seek to influence China's view of its role and responsibility in the merging global and regional order is also of great importance.
Beyond this shift in geopolitical power, a further factor driving global strategic change is the future course of economic globalisation.
The freer movement of goods, services, people and capital across borders has brought many great benefits.
It has generated high rates of global growth.
It has enhanced the prospects, in particular, of developing countries which have opened themselves to the international economy.
The economic globalisation of recent decades has also brought more people around the world out of poverty more quickly than any other time in history.
The challenges of economic globalisation, however, also need to be faced up to and their strategic consequences need to be addressed.
The illegal movement of people, drugs, weapons and capital across borders is accelerating.
There is also growing sense of grievance among some who believe that they have not had full access to the benefits of globalisation, or that they are simply worse off as a result of globalisation.
Even in states which have benefited unambiguously from globalisation, there is often a backlash against it when economic times get tough.
These economic realities have important strategic consequences.
A third major international change is the evolution of the concept of ‘national security'.
Clearly, the traditional concept of the term endures  -  that is, the security of one nation in relation to another.
But the concept has broadened to include the threats to international and national security posed by non-state actors who facilitate the global reach of terrorism.
National security is broadening even further in the outlook of some states to include food security, water security and energy security as well as security from the threat of health pandemics.
Climate change will lead to changed rainfall patterns and, therefore, to changes in agricultural production that will have an impact on food security.
Severe weather events will occur more frequently in some regions, making it more important that nations are ready to respond to natural disasters within and beyond their borders.
Competition for increasingly scarce energy resources will make it more important than ever for nations to manage territorial disputes.
These are all evolving concepts of national security that have significant strategic consequences.
We need to ensure that our international organisations are capable of producing real results in all areas  -  from human rights to trade liberalisation and climate change.
Policy Responses
As governments, the complex challenge we face is to craft policy responses to this rapidly changing region and world.
The new Australian Government is committed to ensuring that we are strong at home.
We are committed to enhancing our national security.
That is why the Government is building a more secure Australia by strengthening our defence for the future, building on the US alliance, and tackling new national security challenges, including long-term energy security.
We are also committed to strengthening the Australian economy.
Australia like other nations faces tough economic times ahead because of the state of the global economy.
That is why the Government is building a stronger Australia through responsible economic management to put downward pressure on inflation and implementing a major economic reform agenda to strengthen our long-term competitiveness and to invest in the industries of the future.
We are also committed to an activist diplomacy aimed at enhancing regional security and an open global economy enhanced by effective institutional and regulatory arrangements.
To achieve this we must act in concert with other states  -  both regionally and globally.
Singapore's Achievements
Australia  -  like Singapore  -  is naturally an outward-looking country.
We both understand the fundamental truth that our future can only be as nations fully engaged in global and regional affairs.
Singapore has demonstrated a remarkable global reach well beyond the physical size of this island republic.
This is equally remarkable given that Singapore is such a new nation state.
Only 45 years ago, Singapore joined with Malaysia.
And then two years later embarked on its own independent course.
In the 43 years since, Singapore has exhibited a significant record of achievement.
For a state to establish itself following the turmoil of independence is no easy task.
Entire national structures must be built.
The institutions of a national economy have to be developed from the ground up.
And Singapore's international personality had to be established.
In all of these things, and against any comparable global measure, Singapore has been a unique success story.
Singapore has become a major centre of regional and global trade.
Singapore has become a global transport centre.
Singapore has become a global financial centre.
Singapore has also maintained a peaceful multi-ethnic society in a region where ethnic tensions have been, from time to time, acute.
There is therefore great potential for our two countries to work creatively together to respond to the great challenges of our region and our world.
ASEAN
Singapore already has a long track record of positive regional activism through ASEAN.
At the height of the Cold War, 41 years ago, the leaders of five South East Asian nations got together to form ASEAN.
Singapore was one of the nations that helped to chart the future course for ASEAN as a founding member.
The world has changed a lot in the intervening 41 years, but ASEAN has endured.
In fact, ASEAN has done more than just endure, it has grown and it has matured.
During Singapore's Chairmanship of ASEAN over the past 12 months, the ASEAN Charter was signed  -  a new milestone in ASEAN's evolution.
I think that ASEAN's most impressive achievement  -  and one that is often under-appreciated  -  is building a sense of regional identity, a sense of community, and a sense of neighbourhood.
The countries of South East Asia have diverse histories, political systems, religious beliefs, social systems and cultural backgrounds.
But a real sense of community has been forged where there had been historically few substantive ties.
In fact when ASEAN was formed, the member states themselves had been riven by conflict then raging through Indochina.
Forty years later, by absolute contrast, the habits of cooperation have crafted a sense of genuine community.
It is a community that defaults first towards dialogue rather than confrontation.
It is a neighbourhood whose residents seek, first and foremost, to cooperate more closely with each other.
In this sense, ASEAN represents an outstanding essay in institutional success for which member states, including Singapore, should be congratulated.
Some criticise ASEAN for being insufficiently activist.
I argue that this criticism is misplaced because it fails to appreciate that ASEAN's great success has been to avoid conflict among member states and allow economic development to progress unimpeded by intra-regional security concerns.
That is why I argue that ASEAN has been a remarkable success story.
ASEAN in turn has given rise to other elements of the wider regional architecture including the East Asia Summit (EAS), the Asia Europe Meeting (AEM) and the ASEAN Regional Forum.
Australia is therefore proud that it was ASEAN's first Dialogue Partner in 1974.
APEC
Of course, another example of cooperation is the one with the broadest membership in our region  -  and that is APEC.
Once described by Gareth Evans as “four adjectives in search of a noun”, APEC has become a noun in its own right nowadays.
APEC has shown that its model of cooperation and dialogue can deliver practical results across the wider region.
Much of the day-to-day work of APEC on harmonisation of customs regulations and similar topics may not shape the global terrain.
But they do make a practical difference to businesses.
They make it easier to conduct business across international boundaries and that helps to drive economic growth by the lowering of the costs of transactions.
If we can take forward APEC's idea for a Free Trade Area of the Asia Pacific (as recommended by the United States), it would be a significant boost to regional prosperity.
APEC also works in the important area of regional disaster response  -  a field in which the ASEAN Regional Forum also plays a role.
If you look around our region over the past decade, the cost of natural disasters has been staggering.
Last year, according to the Red Cross, 241 disasters across Asia resulted in more than 15,000 deaths.
And this year the cyclone in Burma and the earthquake in China have reminded us of the power of nature  -  more than 150,000 lost their lives and so many hundreds of thousands more have been seriously affected.
And these events have reminded us of the need to be able to react quickly.
What is more, they have reminded us that responding to large-scale natural disasters is often beyond the power of even the largest states.
But, if we pool our resources and if we coordinate our assets, we can do more and we can get better results.
In responding to a crisis, the first 24, 48 or 72 hours are critical.
So, we need regional mechanisms that facilitate a quick response.
Australia and Indonesia are going to take a proposal to the APEC Leaders Meeting in Lima, Peru, this year about regional disaster management coordination.
Next year Singapore will host APEC - and I know that Singapore is already working hard to make sure that next year's agenda will be ambitious.
Australia is committed to working closely with Singapore in the lead-up to APEC next year.
Just as we will work with Japan and the United States over the following two years when they will host the APEC Leaders' Meeting.
APEC has a record of helping shape regional responses to challenges like trade liberalisation, trade facilitation, as well as providing a regular forum for meetings of regional heads of government including those of China and the United States.
The Concept of an Asia Pacific Community
Over the years, our regional architecture has evolved.
It is not static.
It has changed greatly since the first steps were taken to establish ASEAN forty-one years ago.
Our region has benefited greatly from the regional architecture that has emerged.
The founders of ASEAN, of APEC and of the East Asia Summit did us a great favour in establishing these organisations.
These institutions have made, do make and will continue to make a great contribution to our security, stability and prosperity.
Earlier I outlined the key drivers of global change.
In twenty years time, the global terrain may well be unrecognisable as a result of deep forces currently reshaping our world.
As governments, I believe we have a responsibility to think about the future and to plan for it.
The alternative is to sit idly by and let our world and our region to be simply reshaped by events  -  as if we were passive by-standers.
My view is simple, either we shape the future, or the future shapes us.
We need to prepare our countries for the future, and we need to prepare our region for the future.
It is for this reason that two months ago in Sydney I highlighted the advantages for the wider Asia-Pacific region in engaging in a conversation about the future of our regional architecture.
And further that that conversation would be usefully directed at how we could develop a concept of an Asia Pacific Community.
Of course, we want a stable region that is secure, open and prosperous.
Our region should be one that opens channels between countries, not one that erects barriers between them.
But how do we ensure that we get that sort of region?
How do we avoid any accidental slide into complacency, competition or even conflict, rather than engrain the habits of cooperation?
One constructive way would be to have a regional discussion about the sort of regional architecture we want to see in the next 20 years.
Open dialogue and discussion is the first step in planning where we want to be.
Inevitably, there will be differing views on this question.
That is a healthy thing.
But it is important to have a conversation that explores the options.
We need to make sure that all of the major players are engaged in an open conversation about the region's future  -  the United States, China, Japan, Korea, Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, Australia and others  -  including India.
And we need to be able to conduct continuous dialogue on any and every challenge we might face  -  from climate change to economic liberalisation, to security cooperation to natural disaster management.
Because as I noted at the outset of this Singapore Lecture, the challenges we face no longer fit neatly within the boundaries of politics, economics, environmental or security concerns.
They cross over these boundaries.
And they eventually cross over national boundaries.
Furthermore, let us be clear about what an Asia Pacific Community is not.
It is not an economic union.
It is not a monetary union.
It is not at this stage a customs union.
And it is certainly not a political union.
All of our existing regional mechanisms have a critical role to play both now and into the future  -  including ASEAN, APEC and the EAS.
But, at the same time, we need to begin our conversation about where our wider region goes from here.
And this is where the wider region needs to learn from ASEAN's success  -  how to build the institutions, habits and practices of cooperation across the policy spectrum and across historically uncomfortable national divides.
Australia and Singapore have a long history of cooperating on effective regional architecture.
And so we look forward to engaging with Singapore as an influential participant in that discussion.
Australia remains open to the suggestions of our regional partners as this discussion unfolds.
Because by definition, an APC by 2020 is very much a long-term project for the future.
Global Challenges
Beyond the region, the long-term capacity of our global institutions to deal with the new generation of global challenges we face also demands debate.
The United Nations remains in need of reform given that many of the challenges to the global system today were not envisaged in 1945.
The International Financial Institutions also remain in need of reform  -  including a new role for the IMF to deal with global financial crises of a type not envisaged at the time of Bretton Woods in 1944.
The failure of the WTO to deliver the Doha Round also reminds us that the political will of the membership is crucial to the success of international bodies.
Climate change also looms as a major new challenge to the global system. The strength of the global community on this challenge will be critically tested at Copenhagen.
And then there is the continuing challenge of non-proliferation for which the next global challenge looms at the point of the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty (NPT) Review Conference in 2010.
The Australian Government has established an International Commission on Nuclear Non-proliferation and Disarmament.
It will be co-chaired by former Australian Foreign Minister Gareth Evans and former Japanese Foreign Minister Yoriko Kawaguchi.
The Commission has a big task in front of it.
The Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty has done a good job over the past 40 years in limiting the spread of nuclear weapons.
But some states have sought to challenge the NPT.
North Korea has developed a nuclear program  -  although we welcome the recent progress towards solving the question of this program.
Other states, such as Iran, have defied the International Atomic Energy Agency and, in doing so, have undermined the Treaty.
With the next five-yearly review of the Treaty due in 2010, we need to look at how we can strengthen support for the Treaty.
We need to strengthen support for safeguards so that nuclear material is strictly controlled.
And we need to develop new thinking about how we work towards the goal of the eventual elimination of nuclear weapons.
It is crucial that we build wide spread support for the Treaty, across regions and between those states with nuclear weapons and those without.
The Commission's task is to help build that support.
Going Forward
For Australia, an important element in all of these challenges is our ongoing cooperation with Singapore, the broader ASEAN membership, and the wider region.
Australia's future will also depend on our ability to engage constructively and effectively with the countries of the Asia Pacific.
That is why I am committed to making Australia the most Asia-literate country in the collective West.
By investing in Asian languages and cultural education in Australia's schools, my vision is for the next generation of Australians  -  businessmen and women, economists, accountants, lawyers, architects, artists, film-makers and performers  -  to develop language skills which open their region to them.
This is part of our long-term vision for a fully regionally engaged Australian nation in this Asia-Pacific century that now unfolds before us.
And in Australia, that process has already begun.
Conclusion
I began this lecture by addressing the drivers of global strategic change.
I want to conclude by saying that to deal with the challenges that arise from these changes, we need effective global institutions, we need effective regional institutions and we need close cooperation with reliable partners.
For Australia, one such partner is Singapore.
We will not always agree.
Nor should we.
That is inevitable for tough-minded nation states like ours.
But because of the common history we share, our many common interests, and our common awareness of the challenges we face, the potential for us to do more together in the region, and in the world for the common good is very great indeed. 


I am delighted to join you for the opening up of a new era in the history of AXA, or for those of us who have been around long enough  -  the old National Mutual, whose history reaches back to 1869.
I am especially pleased to open this building  -  because it is not just as the headquarters for AXA's Australian and New Zealand operations, but it's the headquarters for financial services operations extending to Hong Kong, China, India, Malaysia, Indonesia, Thailand, the Philippines and Singapore.
I congratulate AXA for the growing strength of your offshore financial services business.
I note particularly the extraordinary growth you are enjoying in India, with 94 branches in 83 cities, and 24,000 AXA agents  -  all achieved in just two years.
AXA's longstanding and fast-growing presence in Asia demonstrates a theme close to the heart of the Government's vision for our economic future:
The Government's vision for Australia's future is to build a stronger, fairer Australia  -  capable of meeting the challenges of the future.
Challenges like building long term productivity, preparing for an ageing population, taking decisive action on climate change, engaging fully with the dynamic economies of the Asia-Pacific region.
Part of engaging with the economies of Asia is expanding our reach into the financial services markets of Asia  -  because financial services is one of the fastest growing sectors of the global economy, and the global economy's strongest growth is being achieved in our own region.
As we know, the  past 12 months have brought volatility and continuing uncertainty to global capital markets.
Because of the state of the global economy, like other nations Australia faces tough times ahead.
Australia has an open economy, deeply integrated with global markets  -  especially through our strong financial linkages.
. 
For the most part, that brings great benefits and great opportunities.
But we are not immune from global developments when global conditions become more hostile.
Nevertheless, Australia is well-placed to see our way through these difficult challenges.
The Government is committed to building a stronger Australia, through responsible economic management that helps to put downward pressure on interest rates.
We have a major economic reform agenda to strengthen our long term competitiveness and build a seamless national economy  -  with a highly skilled workforce, advanced infrastructure, competitive markets and more efficient regulation  -  all of which will underpin the competitiveness of the financial services sector.
And we are committed to investing in the industries of the future  -  industries like financial services.
As a financial centre, we are well placed despite the uncertainty in global markets.
First, we have a strong, well regulated banking sector.
Second, our banks' balance sheets are still strong compared against comparable global counterparts.
From day one, the Government has encouraged banks to disclose their positions and address any problems  -  this is part of the proper, transparent functioning of the financial system.
Third, in general, our corporate balance sheets are strong.
Fourth, in addition to a well-regulated financial sector, we have built a strong budget surplus  -  one of the largest surpluses in almost a decade  -  as a buffer to help withstand the challenges now unfolding.
Fifth, we have taken steps to strength Australia's financial markets. We have moved to expand the issuance of Commonwealth Government Securities by up to $25 billion, to support an efficient bond market and reduce its vulnerability to adverse shocks.
Sixth, the Treasurer, the Governor of the Reserve Bank and I have all been working through international forums  -  such as the Financial Stability Forum and the IMF  -  on the crucial issues of liquidity and transparency in the global financial system.
All of this should help Australia to come out the other side of these challenges in a strong position compared with other economies.
As AXA has recognised, there are enormous long term opportunities for Australia's financial services sector in our region.
Those future prospects are driven by strong long term economic and demographic trends in our region:
     * the rapidly increasing flows  of capital;
     * the growing middle classes throughout Asia, with their propensity to save, and
     * ageing populations and the growth in assets under management.
At a global level, financial services present us with great opportunities:
     * Worldwide, financial services exports are worth more than $150 billion per year.
     * Global trade in financial services has been growing faster than in any other services sector, at an average annual rate of 17 per cent this decade.
     * The sophistication and innovation in Australia's financial sector provides us with significant opportunities in global markets  -  in particular, with the world's fourth largest funds management industry, with  $1.1 trillion US dollars in funds under management. AXA is of course a very significant player in this market, with more than $95 billion in funds under management, $20 billion on which is outside Australia.
The Government is committed to supporting businesses like AXA Asia Pacific as they move into regional financial markets and build our position as a financial services hub.
That is why we held the Financial Services Hub Summit in Sydney at the end of last month.
The Summit's purpose was to get the best ideas on the table from all the key stakeholders, so that there is nothing holding this sector back from success in the markets of our region.
A range of priorities were identified at the summit  -  including taxation, workforce skills and regulation.
We heard concerns about the overlap of Commonwealth and State taxes, where businesses face some 53 different Commonwealth, state and local taxes.
The Government has already begun examining some of the matters identified by industry, as part of the Board of Taxation's review into the tax arrangements that apply to managed funds. The Government has also consulted with industry on Australia's future tax treaty program.
Of course in the Government's recent Budget, we have announced a phasing down of the withholding tax on distributions from foreign funds under management, from 30 per cent to 7.5 per cent by 2010-11.
More broadly, the Henry Commission is conducting a wide-ranging review of the Australian tax system, and the Government is referring a number of the tax issues raised at the Summit to this Review.
The Summit also focused on niche areas of financial services where Australia has particular opportunities offshore, including superannuation. 
There was constructive discussion on the workforce  training and immigration policies relevant to the sector in Australia.
And there was a push for a permanent Olympic bid style Committee, to help the liaison between Government and industry to drive the push into regional financial services markets.
As I announced at the Summit, a dedicated unit is being established in the Treasury to drive the review and implementation of policy for the financial services sector, under the oversight of the FSAC.
In the meantime, the Government will continue to work with the sector to open up greater access to overseas markets for financial services, which are often subject to significant barriers to entry.
That is why I have hosted financial services industry lunches in my overseas trips to the United States, China and Japan.
I am pleased that we have already achieved some results.
     * Just over a month ago, Australia secured approval as an investment destination under the Chinese Qualified Domestic Institutional Investor Scheme. This will open opportunities for Chinese banks to offer investment opportunities in Australia  -  providing access to one of fastest growing markets for funds management in the world.
     * During my visit to China in April, China's leaders and I agreed to accelerate our FTA negotiations.  We also agreed that increased access to China's financial services sector was a priority for Australia. 
     * In subsequent meetings our officials have made some progress and we are hopeful that the FTA negotiations will lead to better access to China's market for Australian financial service providers.
     * The Government is also actively pursuing improved access to the Hong Kong market (and indirectly to the mainland Chinese market), by pursuing mutual recognition agreements to help lower barriers for Australian funds managers in the Hong Kong market.
     * In the US in March earlier this year, I announced with the Chair of the US Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) Chris Cox that we would work together to develop mutual recognition of securities regulation.
     * And in June, we brought into force an agreement for mutual recognition of securities offerings between Australia and New Zealand.
We want to work with business like AXA  to identify the barriers to overseas market access that most restrict your capacity to expand our financial services exports.
And as I said at the Summit two weeks ago, if it will assist our efforts to expand the sector's global opportunities, I would be prepared to lead a delegation of senior industry leaders to key Asian economies, to showcase the strengths and sophistication of Australia's financial services sector.
Across this range of key initiatives in tax, deregulation, education, infrastructure and overseas market access  -  the Government is serious about making Australia competitive as a global financial services provider.
So that when a business like AXA enters overseas markets, you know the Australian Government is a partner in your efforts to win new business opportunities that will help create future jobs in buildings like this one, and prosperity for all Australians.
Congratulations to all of the staff of AXA and to Rick Allert and his board for your efforts in creating an Australian footprint in the financial markets of the region.
Financial services are a key element of Australia's economic future  -  and I look forward to this sector becoming part of Australia's global branding.
I hope this outstanding building can itself be a hub for a business that continues to thrive.
And in time, I hope you can outgrow it too.
I am delighted to declare AXA Asia Pacific Holding's new headquarters open for business.


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
In particular, I acknowledge Mrs Pat Green and Mr Frank Horton, representatives of the indigenous community of Tasmania.
I also want to acknowledge the families and friends who lost loved ones here at Port Arthur on April 28 1996, a dark day that remains in our memory.
It is an honour to be present here at this site of such great national significance:
     * a site of outstanding cultural significance;
     * the first convict site to be listed on the National Heritage List in Australia, and
     * the first of the eleven sites on the Australian Convict Sites World Heritage Nomination that will be considered by the World Heritage Committee next year.
After the revelations last month that about the depth of my own convict ancestry  -  perhaps I should feel at home here.
Indeed, not just one, but seven distinct convict lines  -  I am almost a thoroughbred when it comes to my convict past.
One of my forebears from seven generations back was transported to Sydney in 1789, then sent on to Norfolk Island  -  at the time, the only convict settlements in the British Empire more remote than Port Arthur.
A little-known historical footnote is that Port Arthur later became the most remote penal settlement in the Empire, when Norfolk Island ceased as a convict settlement after 1855 and transferred its remaining convicts here.
Port Arthur was also the last penal settlement to receive direct funding from London, with that practice continuing to 1877.
Port Arthur and Australian history
Coming to Port Arthur is a confronting experience for any Australian.
This is the most significant convict heritage site in our nation.
In bricks and mortar, this stark landscape confronts us with the dramatic story of our nation's beginnings  -  a story so familiar that we easily lose sight of just how remarkable and improbable it is.
The story of a faraway land populated by the cast-offs of an empire  -  men and women who remain in the blood lines of so many of us today.
A land out of which arose a nation, that within a century would lead the world in social reform and economic prosperity.
Against a backdrop of such exceptional beauty here at Port Arthur, these foreboding buildings remind us that our nation began with the deprivation of liberty for some 166,000 convicts transported to Australia - 72,000 of whom came to Tasmania, or as it was, Van Dieman's Land.
The scale of convict transportation to Australia was far greater than any other penal colony in the world  -  whether we measure it in terms of the numbers sent, the duration of the journey or the vastness of the areas settled.
This site invites us to come inside  -  inside the story of the Australian nation, and its extraordinary journey. 
Just consider how Port Arthur speaks to us of the achievement and contradictions of our origins.
A nation founded by convicts  -  who on this island comprised a majority of the population until at least the 1850s.
Yet consider the achievement of our nation:
     * Australia became one of the earliest nations to give common people the right to vote, making us now one of the world's oldest and most stable democracies.
     * One of the first nations to introduce women's suffrage.
     * A society that - with the conspicuous exception of its relations with Indigenous Australians  -  found ways to resolve its conflicts peacefully, and without resort to civil war.
     * A nation that became one of the first to embrace the rights of working people: the eight hour working day, the living wage, and crucial social supports like the age pension and workers' compensation.
     * A nation whose people, by the beginning of the twentieth century, enjoyed the best living standards in the world.
And all of this occurred within the lifetimes of men and women who had set foot upon Australian soil as convicts.
Our first Federal Parliament even included a former convict in William Henry Groom  -  a Queenslander, representing the seat of Darling Downs. 
And he was a conservative to boot  -  with his son subsequently also representing Darling Downs in the Parliament, and serving as Attorney General of the Commonwealth some years later.
Indeed, Charles Darwin had remarked of the penal colony as early as 1836, that:
“as a means of making men outwardly honest  -  of converting vagabonds most useless in one hemisphere into active citizens in another, and thus giving birth to a new and splendid country  -  a grand centre of civilisation  -  it had succeeded to a degree perhaps unparalleled in history.”
The Australian story truly is remarkable  -  into a large convict migration, underpinned too by the extraordinary ancient cultures of the Indigenous people whose role in our history we are only now beginning to understand and recognise.
The Separate Prison
Port Arthur reflects many of the contradictions of the early Australian nation.
Though Port Arthur is perhaps the greatest symbol of convict Australia, in fact most convicts did not serve out their sentence behind bars  -  rather, the prison was reserved for secondary offenders.
Despite the exceptionally beautiful landscape, Port Arthur was a harsh, cold and fearful place  -  as depicted in the great 19th century novel by Marcus Clarke, For The Term of His Natural Life.
Yet there is another side to Port Arthur.
It was a place of isolation and punishment  -  yet as the work of the Authority has helped us understand, this was also a place where prisoners enjoyed access to an extensive library of contemporary books, and established a substantial garden.
It was a centre of industry and skilled workmanship  -  from shipbuilding, blacksmithing and shoemaking to carpentry and brick making  -  skills that many of the convicts acquired after coming to the colony as boys.
Indeed, the Separate Prison that we re-open today was intended to achieve a radical reform of penal practices.
It was conceived not as a place of punishment, but a place for prisoners to contemplate their failings and to be reformed.
Floggings were replaced with extended periods of solitary confinement designed to reform the individual through reflection and isolation.
Two new approaches to penal reform influenced the Separate Prison  -  first, the concept of the prison as a penitentiary, or place of repentance, developed by Pennsylvania's Quakers with the Eastern State Penitentiary in 1829.
They had hoped ‘the silent system' and not the lash would transform hardened criminals.
Second, Port Arthur was influenced by the reformist utilitarianism of the philosopher Jeremy Bentham, in which treatment of prisoners was to be measured, predictable and efficient  -  not harsh, arbitrary, unpredictable or capricious.
In turn, both these approaches to penal systems were largely abandoned.
In understanding the significance of Port Arthur, we should understand the context of social disorder, injustice and foment in Europe against which the early colonists sought to create an ordered society in this new land.
Previous decades had seen:
     * the Industrial Revolution;
     * the American War of Independence
     * the explosive growth of urban populations;
     * the political upheaval created by the French Revolution with its overthrow of the monarchy and established church, and then many long years of war until Napoleon's defeat in 1815, and
     * a widespread fear of crime and social breakdown, which underpinned the harsh system of transportation.
Throughout the 19th century, many of those arriving in Australia left behind them extreme poverty or even starvation.
Life in this place was difficult and unfamiliar.
Yet life in Australia also offered the possibility of freedom  -  ultimately for both free settlers and convicts - a new start, with possibilities that simply did not exist back at home.
Those possibilities were to be realised by successive generations who founded the Australian nation.
And it is here we see something of the beginnings of the Australian nation  -  founded in adversity; people forced from foreign lands and others who came in pursuit of opportunity, both availing themselves of the freedom this land offered to them all.
From early on Australians had a special understanding of the reality of the underdog, creating the strong commitment to ensuring a fair go for all.
Fairness is etched deep into the Australian soul.
I congratulate the Port Arthur Historic Site Management Authority and the Conservation and Infrastructure Team for the exceptional work they have done on the restoration of the Separate Prison.
Congratulations to the architects and all of the skilled professionals and tradespeople who have put their heart and soul into such a complex restoration project.
I know it has been a complex, painstaking process to reconstruct this part of the Separate Prison using traditional skills.
But this work will give visitors a far better appreciation and connection to a place of such heritage significance.
It is a great achievement, and I understand that the Authority has plans for significant additional work that will further enhance the experience of visiting Port Arthur. 
The Australian Government believes that it is vital that we continue to identify and protect the places integral to our national story, so that they can help us remember and understand that we are part of a living history.
On behalf of the Australian Government, I also thank the Tasmanian Government for their partnership on this important heritage initiative.
It is vital that we continue to appreciate, recognise and protect our investment in our National and World Heritage sites. 
They are important to our history, our future and to the local economy of many parts of Australia.
Recent studies indicate that Australia's World Heritage properties generate $12 billion annually and support over 120,000 jobs across the nation.
Port Arthur is a great example of how heritage places can contribute to national and local tourism.
Hundreds of thousands of people from across Tasmania, Australia and the world make the journey to Port Arthur every year, ensuring that this site is both protected and appreciated.
We treasure Port Arthur for what it teaches us about our past, for the way it enriches our present, and for its contribution to our future.
Thank you to everyone for your efforts in contributing to its conservation.
I am pleased now to present Barry Jones with a plaque marking the National Heritage Listing of Port Arthur.
And I am delighted to declare the Separate Prison of Port Arthur open again, here at this site of such great national significance.
This will help ensure that this vital heritage site is accessible to future generations  -  so they too can begin to understand the extraordinary story of the founding of the Australian nation.
A nation without history is like a person without memory. And memory helps shape our hopes and vision for the future. Let us therefore celebrate our history as together we craft the future for this great nation, Australia.


It's good to be back in New Zealand.
Although this is my first official visit as Prime Minister, I have already met Prime Minister Helen Clark many times here in New Zealand and in Australia and we have become good friends.
For an Australian Prime Minister, the relationship with New Zealand is always a core priority.
For both our governments, the relationship between our countries is always a core priority.
And so it should be.
Ours is a unique relationship In part because of the history we share, summed up through the word ANZAC.
In part because of the work we do together in the region and the world.
In part because of the sheer depth of engagement with each other.
More fundamentally, this relationship is unique because it goes far beyond the relationship between governments.
The depth to the relationship comes from the extraordinary ties between our business people, our sports people, our academic communities and because of the approximately one million people that travel in each direction every year.
So governments on both sides of the Tasman have to recognise that in the case of Australia-New Zealand relations, we don't run the show.
We are just one strand of the relationship.
But today, when I met Prime Minister Clark, we discussed how we can do more to strengthen our strand of the relationship.
And there were three main topics we discussed.
First, our economic relationship.
Second, our roles and responsibilities with the Pacific Island countries, as we both head to Niue for the Pacific Islands Forum.
And third, how we can work together on the global challenge of climate change.
Even Closer Economic Relations
First, I would like to talk about the economic relationship.
And I would like to do that against the backdrop of the new Australian Government's economic policy approach.
Australia, like other nations, faces tough economic times ahead.
The global economy is going through some turbulent waters  -  financial market instability; rising oil and food prices; and slowing growth in some major developed economies.
Most recently, we have seen the disappointing breakdown of the Doha Round of world trade talks in Geneva.
At a time of economic uncertainty, an ambitious outcome from the Doha Round would have sent a strong signal that governments around the world remained committed to freer trade.
The challenge for us now is to lock in the progress that was made at the recent Ministerial Meeting and make another push to resolve the remaining differences.
Australia and New Zealand want the same things from the Doha Round.
We both want to secure the reforms on offer, particularly in locking in substantial reform to world agricultural trade.
The Doha Round is too important to let the possible gains slip through our fingers.
In the face of these global economic uncertainties, the Australian Government's response is to make sure we are able to cope with these challenges by:
     * responsible economic management to put downwards pressure on interest rates and inflation;
     * a  major economic reform program, including deregulation to create a seamless national economy; and
     * investing in our human and physical capital  - to keep us competitive in the long term.
We are also firmly of the belief that the best economic prospects for Australia lie in closer economic engagement with the wider world.
And a central element in that is even closer economic engagement with New Zealand.
This year is the 25th anniversary of Closer Economic Relations agreement between Australia and New Zealand  -  CER.
CER is one of the world's oldest trade agreements.
It is also widely and rightly seen as one of the most successful.
It has played a vital role in nurturing the vibrant and integrated economic relationship that our two countries enjoy.
Since CER was signed, New Zealand's exports to Australia have grown at an average of 7.7 per cent a year.
Overall trans-Tasman trade has grown at over 8 per cent a year in the last 25 years.
Last year, two-way trade in goods and services was worth 21.5 billion Australian dollars.
CER has helped to forge a trans-Tasman business community of which each of you are members  -  indeed shareholders.
It is useful to remind ourselves of what the world looked like when the CER was finalised and signed in 1983 by the Hawke Labor Government on the Australian side:
     * trans-Tasman relations were recovering from Australia's 1981 re-discovery of the lost art of underarm bowling
     * agriculture remained firmly locked-out of the multilateral trading system, with the Tokyo GATT Round having failed to include farm trade in any meaningful way;
     * in our region, ASEAN was composed of just five members, serving a primarily political role as a bloc to prevent the spread of communism to south-east Asia; and
     * in the wider region, China's economic explosion had not yet begun.
Against this backdrop, Australia and New Zealand signed a free trade agreement that remains one of the most comprehensive, liberal and forward-looking in the world. 
The question today, is where to now for Australia, New Zealand and CER? 
In global terms, CER has delivered an impressive level of integration, but more remains to be done.
Our Ministers met just last week in Melbourne to discuss the next steps for CER.
The challenge before governments on both sides of the Tasman is to drive forward the creation of the Single Economic Market, building a seamless economy between Australia and New Zealand of more than 25 million people. 
That is why we welcome the strengthened engagement from the Clark Government in working with Australia to finalise an Investment Protocol to CER, which we hope will reduce compliance costs for Australian and New Zealand investors. 
Australia wants to be ambitious here  -  our aim is to reduce the amount of screening that currently occurs in relation to investment flows between the two countries.
In addition to the Investment Protocol, we want to conclude negotiations for a new tax treaty.
Australia's Treasurer, Wayne Swan, recently invited the New Zealand Treasury to make a submission to the Australian Government on the mutual recognition of dividend imputation  -  or franking  -  credits, which I know is of concern to New Zealand business.
Furthermore, we need to develop a regime which facilitates the portability of retirement savings across the Tasman. 
This measure goes to the heart of removing disincentives to the free movement of people across the Tasman by allowing individuals to consolidate their retirement savings.  
The Australian Government looks forward to working with the New Zealand Government to complete this work, and then take on the next reform challenges.
The Council of Australian Governments (COAG) is another area where we can do more. 
Since being elected last November, the Australian Government has put a lot of effort into getting the state and federal governments to work together more cooperatively through COAG.
One focus has been on harmonising regulatory frameworks.
I want Australia-New Zealand relations to plug into this work.
Wherever possible I want to look at how we can extend to New Zealand the work we are doing in the COAG Business Regulation and Competition Working Group on national regulatory arrangements.
It is all about making it easier for businesses to operate across the Tasman.
The Trans Tasman Mutual Recognition Arrangement, concluded in 1998, shows how much this type of integration can offer.
The Mutual Recognition Arrangement overcame in one fell swoop a number of regulatory barriers to the movement of goods between our countries and people wishing to pursue their occupations on both sides of the Tasman.
I also want our governments to look at how we can expand CER outwards.
The most important of these is our work in negotiating a new trade agreement between Australia and New Zealand  -  negotiating as CER  -  with ASEAN, representing ten economies. 
The importance of this arrangement is underscored by its economic weight  -  the ASEAN-CER market would have a combined GDP of 2.3 trillion US dollars, which is more than twice as large as India - at 1.1 trillion US dollars - and nearly three-quarters the size of China's 3.3 trillion dollar economy. 
It is a complex negotiation but I hope that the last obstacles can be overcome in the coming weeks when Trade Ministers meet in Singapore.
On an even larger scale, Australia is committed to seeing a comprehensive, region-wide trade and economic agreement spanning both sides of the Pacific, and we welcome APEC's current discussion of an FTA for the Asia Pacific. 
As two founding members of APEC, Australia and New Zealand have a stake in taking forward this ambitious goal. 
Australia also supports the efforts of the East Asia Summit to deepen integration through its study on Comprehensive Economic Partnership in East Asia (CEPEA).
New Zealand has also been an active player in the so-called P4 grouping  -  with Singapore, Chile and Brunei  -  which could provide a building block towards a broader APEC-wide economic agreement. 
With a range of regional economic initiatives being discussed and pushed forward, the Australian Government believes that we need to begin to have a debate about how we want our region to look in the decades ahead.
That is why in June I proposed that the region should begin to discuss the kind of regional architecture we want by 2020, what I've termed an Asia-Pacific Community.
We need to make sure that all of the major players are engaged in an open conversation about the region's future  -  the United States, China, Japan, Korea, Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, Australia and others  -  including India.
And we need to be able to conduct continuous dialogue on any and every challenge we might face  -  from climate change to economic liberalisation, to security cooperation, to natural disaster management.
As our partner in CER, I am very keen to hear New Zealand's views about this idea.
I have appointed an envoy to visit regional capitals to take soundings about an Asia Pacific Community.
And I have asked him to make New Zealand the first visit in his program to engage the government as well as the business and academic communities.
Our Pacific Neighbourhood
The other important element to our relationship is how we work together with our Pacific colleagues to ensure a stable, sustainable and prosperous region. 
Since coming to office, I have urged closer coordination between Australia and New Zealand on our regional policy settings. 
My reason for wanting this seamless coordination is simple. 
The Australian Government wants a new era of cooperative relations with the Pacific Island countries.
And to achieve that we need to work closely with our partners in New Zealand.
When combined, Australia and New Zealand are by far the single biggest influence on developments in the Pacific. 
But with this influence, comes responsibility. 
Responsibility to do what we can to promote sustainable economic development in a region that is largely performing poorly against key development indicators including the United Nations' Millennium Development Goals, when much of the rest of the developing world has been improving.
Nearly 18,000 children each year in the Pacific region die in the first 18 months of life, many in the first month after birth.
Maternal mortality rates have worsened in some regional countries over the last 15 years. 
About 1,000 women die annually from complications of pregnancy and childbirth.
There is mixed progress towards universal primary education, but the region as a whole is not on track to achieve this.
There are many more examples I could give.
We must work with our Pacific friends and partners to improve these development outcomes.
In March the Australian Government outlined its new approach to the Pacific in the Port Moresby Declaration.
We are committed to a new era of cooperation with the Pacific Island countries, exemplified by the Pacific Partnerships for Development.
The Partnerships will over time cover all aspects of our development relationships with partner countries, including infrastructure, basic health and education, improved public sector management and community based development.
Partnerships are based on a concept of genuine partnership  -  partnership that recognises responsibilities and contributions of both parties and their mutual accountability for better development results.
We will be listening to our Pacific Island partners, not dictating to them.
They have the ultimate responsibility for the policies and programs which will deliver development to their peoples.
We will be working closely with them to achieve these outcomes.
We will be also be working with other donors, especially New Zealand, but also including the World Bank, the Asian Development Bank, the European Union, Japan and emerging regional donors.
Another ambition Australia and New Zealand share is to deepen consultation with our Pacific Island neighbours on a region-wide economic integration initiative called PACER-plus. 
Trade Ministers from the Pacific met in late July and agreed to further consultations on the proposal in 2009.
We hope PACER-plus can provide new energy for closer economic integration in the Pacific.
Our approach to PACER-plus is to have an integrated trade and development assistance approach.
So we will be looking at incorporating capacity building into the agreement.
We will be working closely with New Zealand and the Pacific Island countries to take this initiative forward.
Together with you, the business community, we will be seeking new and innovative ways to collaborate in the Pacific to promote new business and private sector activity, activity that will  increase economic and social opportunity for the region's citizens. 
Climate Change: the Next Chapter?
As we look at the Pacific, we have to recognise that climate change will be the biggest challenge we face in the decades ahead.
I have described climate change as one of the greatest moral, economic and environmental challenges of our age, and it is therefore fundamental that Australia and New Zealand build on a common heritage of hard work to tackle this menace.
We cannot sit back and wait for others to tackle the problem on our behalf.
We have to be brave enough to realise the imperative of action.
And I would like to publicly recognise the leading role New Zealand has taken on climate change globally.
If we are to influence the global response to climate change, we must also act locally. 
And we both have decided to act.
There are several areas where close cross-Tasman cooperation is necessary.
First, on adapting to the effects of climate change, Australia and New Zealand have an important role to play in the Pacific to help our neighbours  -  especially low-lying atoll nations  -  deal with the implications of climate change. 
Climate change will be the theme of this week's Pacific Islands Forum, where I will outline to Pacific leaders some of the first funding decisions from Australia's $150 million International Climate Change Adaptation Initiative. 
Climate change mitigation is also an area where Australian and New Zealand technology and expertise will be in high demand.
As you all know, both governments are also working on the development of emissions trading schemes. 
Australia's Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme Green Paper was released on 16 July 2008.
Extensive community consultation is now underway ahead of the release of a White Paper on scheme design and exposure draft legislation before the end of the year.
In developing our ideas, I have been pleased by the close consultation and collaborative work between our respective policy advisers and scientists. 
Such close cooperation has ensured that no barriers exist between our respective schemes that would prevent future linkages, should the Australian and New Zealand Governments decide to make them.
This is no accident.  Our governments have cooperated closely to ensure that the schemes can be linked.
As we look to the future, and the international linkages that will be required to reduce both global emissions and the costs of doing so, continued close Australian-New Zealand collaboration will be needed. 
In the meantime, there are other pressing challenges, demanding our close cooperation.  
Next year, in Copenhagen, the world will seek to conclude a new, landmark multilateral post-2012 outcome.
At Copenhagen, the international community must conclude an ambitious, comprehensive outcome that would see all countries better act on climate change. 
Australia and New Zealand are working closely to pool our ideas, strategies and negotiating weights to influence for the better the outcome of next year's conference.
Conclusion
I want to see Australia and New Zealand working more closely together.
I want to see us working more closely together bilaterally, driving towards the Single Economic Market.
I want to see us working more closely together regionally, in a joined-up approach to the challenges of the South Pacific.
I want to see us working more closely together globally, striving towards an outcome for the Doha Development Round, and on the profound challenges of climate change.
Our two great countries remain unique forces for good in the world.
When Australia and New Zealand work together, we can achieve more than the sum of our parts.
The government I lead will play its full part in ensuring that, together, we cooperate even more closely into the future to realise that potential.


The Government has now been in office for a little less than nine months - or just under a quarter of the current Parliamentary term.
In our first nine months our priority has been three-fold:
     * to lay the foundations of a program of responsible economic management in the face of increasing global economic uncertainty;
     * to implement, principally through the Budget process, the commitments we made last year to the Australian people on tax, on income support and childcare to help those under financial pressure; and
     * third, to begin to lay out a policy and financial framework for addressing Australia's long-term challenges in education, in hospitals, infrastructure, climate change and water following 12 years of neglect.
As we begin a new parliamentary sitting, I would like to outline our overall approach to the Government's policy framework for the future.
I would also like to outline more specifically an important part of the Government's commitment to implement an Education Revolution: namely, a policy agenda to significantly improve the quality of Australia's schools.
Around the world today, governments are dealing with the most challenging global economic conditions since the early 1990s.
The US sub-prime crisis has changed the economic outlook for the global economy and consequently for Australia as well.
As the US Federal Reserve Governor Ben Bernanke said on the weekend, the global financial storm “has not yet subsided”.
Canada, France, Germany, Italy and Japan have already registered negative quarters of economic growth.
Australia, as a result, has confronted a particularly complex set of economic challenges this year.
Contractionary pressures abroad.
Compounded by inflationary pressures, low productivity growth and supply constraints in the domestic economy  -  in large part the legacy of a decade of policy neglect.
This has presented real challenges for economic policy from the earliest days that we have been in office.
The Government has nonetheless moved quickly to respond to these challenges.
We have delivered responsible economic management, with a conservative Budget grounded in a $22 billion of surplus.
That surplus was designed to put maximum downward pressure on inflation  -  made necessary because the Government inherited inflation at 16 year highs, 10 consecutive interest rate rises and the second highest interest rates in the developed world.
This surplus was achieved by arresting expenditure growth, which had been growing in real terms at four per cent in the previous four years, and by reducing tax to its lowest level as a share of GDP in nearly a decade.
The surplus was also designed to provide a buffer for the future  -  the policy flexibility to negotiate any uncertain economic times which might lie ahead  -  which is why the Liberals' current assault on the surplus in the Senate is so grossly irresponsible.
Furthermore, despite widespread calls to drop our commitment to tax relief, we delivered a $55 billion Working Families Support Package  -  together with a $7.5 billion package for seniors, carers and disability pensioners  -  all designed to help Australians under financial pressure.
Finally, the Government through its regulatory agencies has been actively engaged with global financial institutions in responding to the global financial crisis, while maintaining the domestic liquidity needs of Australian financial markets through concrete measures in the public bond market.
While prosecuting a policy of responsible economic management, the Government has also been determined to honour its pre-election commitments to the Australian people.
When we formed government, I said I had no intention of recycling the absolute cynicism of previous governments - making a swag of pre-election commitments then reneging on them as “non-core” promises.
That's why we have delivered:
     * Tax cuts for low and middle income earners.
     * The Education Tax Refund.
     * Raising the child care tax rebate from 30 to 50 per cent.
     * A permanent increase in the utilities allowance for pensioners, carers and those on the Disability Support Pension.
     * Re-instatement of the Commonwealth Dental Scheme.
     * First Home Saver Accounts.
     * Rolling out computers in schools and trades training centres across Australia's 2,685 secondary schools.
     * Abolishing AWAs for the future and building a modern, fair and flexible workplace relations system.
     * Taking decisive action on climate change both at home through the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme and through our negotiations abroad following our ratification of Kyoto; and
     * Bringing the blame game to an end by reinvesting in the nation's public hospital system.
We are honouring our commitments made to the Australian people.
But for us that's not the end game. In fact it marks just the beginning.
The beginning of a period of long-term reform to tackle the nation's long term challenges.
Because for this government that is the central purpose of being in government  -  to make a fundamental difference to the future direction of the nation.
We are determined not to repeat the neglect and wasted opportunities of the Liberals in government.
For years we watched in frustration as the best economic opportunities in a generation passed us by.
Rather than investing the proceeds of the mining boom, the Liberals squandered them on consumption.
It was a decade of opportunities squandered, not of opportunities seized.
Our Government belongs to the reforming centre of Australian politics  -  a tradition that recognises the limitations of both markets and of governments.
We believe policy reform is necessary if Australia is to seize the future.
Our long term reform agenda embraces the full canvas of government, including how we build:
     * a more secure Australia given the new national security challenges we face;
     * a stronger Australia given the long term challenges to our economy;
     * a fairer Australia given the extreme levels of disadvantage that continues to exist among us; and
     * an Australia capable of meeting the sweeping new challenges of the 21st century, including climate change.
The first priority of government is the nation's security.
This challenge is becoming increasingly complex as the balance of global strategic and economic power shifts to the Asia-Pacific region, as terrorism continues as a global and regional threat, and new challenges emerge such as energy security.
That is why we are developing a plan to strengthen our defence forces, to enhance our relations with friends and allies and to tackle non-traditional threats like terrorism, natural disasters, water scarcity, food scarcity and energy security.
The starting point will be a new national security policy, to be outlined in a National Security Statement  -  the first in Australia  -  during this session of the Parliament.
We are also bringing new rigour to our defence planning through a new Defence White Paper that will detail the emerging strategic terrain we face and how our policy and defence procurements will respond.
And, to give our Armed Forces the resources they need, the Government has committed to providing 3 per cent real growth in defence spending for the full decade ahead.
The Government will strengthen the US alliance as well as our security cooperation with regional partners like Japan, the Republic of Korea, Indonesia, Malaysia and Singapore.
And, to help shape the future of our region, we have begun a regional dialogue about an Asia-Pacific Community to build a culture within our region of security cooperation.
We believe we must try to shape the future of our region rather than let it simply be shaped by events  -  and that means unapologetically prosecuting an activist defence, foreign and security policy for the future.
The Government is committed to using the proceeds of the mining boom to invest in Australia's long term economic future.
The key to building a strong economy is long-term productivity growth.
Over the last 40 years, productivity growth has accounted for more than 80 per cent of the improvement in Australia's living standards. 
But in recent years productivity growth has declined sharply  -  from average annual growth of 3.3 per cent during the productivity cycle of the mid-1990s, to just 1.1 per cent in the current cycle.
The Government is committed to building our long-term prosperity by investing in five key platforms for productivity growth:
     * an education revolution by improving the qualitative and quantitative investment in the skills of the workforce  -  driven in part by our $11 billion Education Investment Fund;
     * second, a nation-building infrastructure plan;
     * third, investing in innovation and the industries of the future;
     * fourth, creating a seamless national economy through business deregulation; and
     * finally, taxation reform.
I will return to education presently as this will go to the core of my remarks today.
On infrastructure, we have begun our reform program by establishing a $20 billion Building Australia Fund to support critical national infrastructure such as road, rail, ports and high speed broadband.
We have reinvigorated the Council of Australian Governments with a major reform agenda, including a list of 27 areas of regulatory reform for building a seamless national economy.
And we have established the Henry Commission as the starting point for long-term reform of tax, welfare and retirement incomes.
Creating a fairer Australia is a crucial part of the Government's reform agenda.
Disadvantage holds the economy back by reducing workforce participation.
It also holds the economy back by increasing demand on public resources.
Disadvantage forces too many Australians to live on the fringes of the nation's economic and social life, struggling for training, work, health care, dental care and access to housing.
In many cases that disadvantage is compounded by a combination of family breakdown and the weakening of community ties.
Our challenge is to bring these Australians back into the mainstream through a reform agenda of social inclusion.
The Government will be pursuing new ways of doing this.
Through tax relief towards the bottom end of the income scale.
Through a review of retirement incomes with a view to placing pensioners on a more secure footing for the future.
Through action on homelessness.
Through a package of housing affordability measures, including First Home Saver Accounts, the National Rental Affordability Scheme and the Housing Affordability Fund.
Through working to close the gap with Indigenous Australian's.
And through getting rid of Work Choices and building a fair and flexible industrial relations system for the future.
Australia must now prepare also for the sweeping set of challenges that we face for the future  -  rather than simply burying our heads in the sand.
That's why the Government is prosecuting a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, a national energy efficiency and renewable energy strategy.
That's why the Government, for the first time in the history of the Commonwealth, has begun the large scale buy-back of water entitlements to reduce the obscene levels of over-allocation in the Murray Darling River System. 
That's why the Government is developing a long term agenda to reform the health and hospital system including increased investment in public hospitals, a national preventative health strategy, the reduction of elective surgery waiting lists and the introduction of GP super clinics  -  all necessary responses to a great challenge for how to deal with the rapidly ageing population of the Australia into the future.
The Commonwealth can't tackle all these challenges on its own. 
It's also going to take a new way of governing  -  particularly increased cooperation between federal, state and local governments, businesses and community organisations.
We want to take Australians with us by engaging with the community, by harnessing the best ideas and by drawing on the best talents of our people.
That's why we convened the 2020 Summit  -  to get the best ideas on Australia's future.
That's why we have also made Community Cabinet meetings part of our regular program of government.
That's also why we will be drawing in the private and community sectors, to partner with the Government in new ways of achieving our reforms.
We will start this through our reforms to Indigenous education and employment programs.
It is based on our view that government is not the repository of all wisdom, that there are limits to what governments can effectively do and that the private and community sectors have much, often very much to offer.
The five policy areas that I have discussed constitute the framework for the long term reform agenda for the nation and for the government.
I said before that within this framework, the core of our economic reform agenda is to build long-term productivity growth  -  in large part by an education revolution in the quantity and quality of our national investments in the education of the next generation of Australians.
Today I want to outline the next chapter in Australia's education revolution - the reform of school education.
In my first major policy speech as leader of the Federal Parliamentary Labor Party last year, I argued why Australia needs an education revolution.
I said the evidence about the link between long term prosperity, productivity growth and investment in human capital could not be clearer.
As the OECD said in 2006:
“evidence of the public and private benefits of education is growing.  Application of knowledge and skills are at the heart of economic growth, with the OECD attributing half of GDP per capita growth from 1994 to 2004 to rising labour productivity.”
That is why we are committed to delivering an education revolution.
In our first Budget we allocated $19.3 billion to education initiatives over the next four years to help deliver our commitments on:
     * a national curriculum in English, maths, the sciences and history;
     * a $1.2 billion Digital Education Revolution;
     * a $2.5 billion Trades Training Centre program; and
     * guaranteed funding to both government and non-government schools.
The Liberal Government talked about teacher training, performance standards, literacy and numeracy. But after 12 years, 24 reports and 220 recommendations, there was nothing much to show of it. 
No national teaching standards.
No national curriculum.
Too many kids still leaving school too early.
Too many who are unable to read or write.
And now we are playing a game of catch up football. There is clearly much to be done.
While Australian schools stand up reasonably well in international comparisons, our competitors are quickly catching up.
A 2006 OECD study shows Australia's average performance in reading literacy worsened between 2003 and 2006, primarily because of a decline in the percentage of high-performing students.
It shows that in scientific literacy, 40 percent of Australia's Indigenous students, 27 percent of students in remote schools and 23 percent of students from the lowest socioeconomic quartile performed below the OECD baseline.   
Australia also has relatively low levels of Year 12 completion by OECD standards. 
After doubling in the 1980s and early 1990s, our retention rates have flat-lined at around 75 per cent since 1992. 30 per cent fewer Indigenous young people reach a Year 12 qualification than non-Indigenous.
Why does this matter? Because students with low literacy and numeracy in Year 9 are more likely to get frustrated and leave school early  -  and more likely to end up unemployed or only marginally attached to the workforce.
Conversely, the evidence shows that each additional year of schooling increases individual earnings by around 10 per cent.
Another recent study found that increasing a country's literacy scores by 1 per cent against the international average is associated with an increase in living standards of 1.5 per cent of GDP per capita. 
That is why, through COAG, we are developing reforms aimed at achieving the ambitious national goals of lifting Year 12 or equivalent attainment to 90 per cent by 2020. 
When COAG meets in October and December this year, we will be working towards historic reforms to Commonwealth-State relations.
In the area of schools it's time to move beyond outdated divisions between Commonwealth and State responsibilities and between public and private provision.
Our focus must be on the basics: ensuring that all of our children emerge from school able to read and write, with basic maths and science skills and the ability to enter the workforce, vocational training or university study.
So what is to be done?
Greater accountability to parents and the public is one important area of reform.
Greater transparency for the outcomes achieved by Australian schools is another area of reform.  
All Australian schools  -  public and private  -  need to do more to demonstrate the outcomes they achieve with the resources they receive from the broader community.
This is not about creating an arbitrary public league table. 
It is about ensuring that all schools, all teachers and all students are focused on achieving the results we need as a nation and realising the potential also of each child.
That is why I am today announcing three central pillars of reform in schools that the Commonwealth aims to achieve through Council of Australian Governments later this year:
     * one, improving the quality of teaching;
     * two, making school reporting properly transparent; and
     * three, lifting achievement in disadvantaged school communities.
The States and Territories are important partners in this process.
Our challenge to them is to commit to concrete, tangible reforms.
And our commitment to them is to match ambitious policy reform on the one hand, with new financial support on the other as part of our upcoming National Policy Partnership negotiations on the future of education.
Research shows that nothing at school influences student outcomes more than excellent teaching.
It has measurable impacts on cognitive, affective and behavioural development.
Studies suggest that the quality of teaching accounts for something between 30 and 60 per cent of the outcome across these areas.
A McKinsey report on the world's best performing school systems last year highlighted the importance of recruiting the top university students into teacher training.  
In Korea, those recruited into teaching are in the top 5 per cent of students; in Finland, they are recruited from the top 10 per cent and in Singapore and Hong Kong, the top 30 per cent.
I believe our teachers are our greatest economic asset.
We need to re-establish in Australia that teaching is a great profession and a great calling for the best and brightest of our university graduates.
We must insist on teaching excellence in every school. 
And insist that school leadership is strengthened, particularly in schools where the learning needs of students are most acute. 
Of the school-based influences on outcomes, school leadership is second only to teaching in its importance.
That is why the Government will work through COAG to start a new era in Australian school education, starting with a National Policy Partnership on Quality Teaching.
To establish new national standards to reward both principals and the best performing teachers.
To provide additional funding to encourage school systems to invest in teacher recruitment, development and excellence.
The package will also include measures to recruit the nation's most talented graduates into teaching and place them where they can make the greatest difference.
In recent years the US and the UK have implemented innovative and successful programs of this kind  -  the Teach for America and the Teach First programs  -  where highly talented graduates are given an accelerated pathway into teaching, placed into the most challenging school environments and paid at a higher rate.
They also receive mentoring and support from leading businesses and an option of employment after they complete their initial teaching assignment should they choose to leave. 
These programs have given talented young graduates a taste for teaching  -  and many have made it their life profession as a result.
Under our new reform partnership, beginning from next year, we will work towards establishing a similar scheme in Australia.
Participation will be open to non-government as well as government schools  -  because we know  there are disadvantaged schools across the entire education spectrum. 
Currently, most teachers reach a salary ceiling at around $75,000. If they aspire to earn more, they must leave the classroom.
We need to send a clear message to university students that teaching is a rewarding long term career.
And send a message to experienced teachers within the school system that they should keep striving for excellence.
I want our best and brightest teachers motivated and rewarded to work in our most challenging schools.
I want school principals to have the autonomy to make more staffing and salary decisions at the local level, to tackle local problems like poor literacy and numeracy.
And I want teachers spending their time doing what they do best  -  and that's teaching - not losing their valuable hours in paperwork or on tasks better handled by support staff.
Last year I said that Australian school students deserve a higher level of transparency concerning the overall performance of their schools. 
The Government is committed to investing substantially in our schools to deliver better outcomes.
But we will not be making those investments without demanding greater accountability in return.
As I said in January 2007, we are committed to a greater quantitative effort in the funding of the school system, but beyond that qualitative performance is equally important.
I appreciate there can be debate about the most reliable indicators of school effectiveness.
But I cannot understand why public institutions such as schools should not be accountable to the community that funds their salaries and their running costs.
Right now, we do not have accurate, comprehensive information to allow rigorous analysis of what schools and students are achieving. 
This must change.
Parents have a right to information to inform their family's decision making about school enrolment.
It is important, too, that this information gives parents the full picture.
Simplistic league tables don't really tell us how well a school is performing.
They don't tell us about the student population that the school started with  -  and its level of educational advantage.
Everyone understands why a private school on Sydney's north shore might do better than a comprehensive government high school in the outer suburbs.
But it is not unreasonable to expect that schools with a similar mix of students and similar starting points should do equally well.
What parents most want to know is what difference a school is going to make  -  in other words, the extent to which it is adding value to the results of their students.
Parents overseas can get this information. Australian parents  -  and students  -  deserve the same.
That is why today I announce that we will be making agreement on individual school performance reporting a condition of the new national education agreement to come into effect from 1 January 2009.
Within a year, we want to see increased information available to Australian parents.
And within three years, a report that shows not just how their child is doing, but how their child's school is performing compared to similar schools.
Knowing where there is underperformance will help us to target additional resources.
I know some will resist these changes.
There is little doubt that greater transparency will reveal some schools in Australia may be seriously underperforming and may have been struggling for some time.
Many, but not all, of these schools serve disadvantaged communities.
Many, but by no means all, of these schools are in the government school system.
We should not tolerate underperformance. It damages the students irreversibly. It fails their families. And therefore it must change.
Where it is clear that individual schools are not up to the mark, we need to be prepared to invest money and effort to lift their performance. 
And where despite best efforts, these schools are not lifting their performance, the Commonwealth expects education authorities to take serious action  -  such as replacing the school principal, replacing senior staff, reorganising the school or even merging that school with other more effective schools.
Tough action is necessary if we are to achieve real change. And it's tough action that our reform payments will reward.
A third focus of our school reforms is to tackle underachievement in our most disadvantaged school communities.
In Australia, socioeconomic status is more strongly associated with educational achievement than it should be.
I have already referred to the OECD research which found that students in the lowest socioeconomic quartile lagged those in the highest socioeconomic quartile by 2½ years.
If Australia is to be the land genuinely of the fair go, we must do a better job in ensuring that every young Australian gets a decent education.
That is why today I announce that we will pursue a further National Policy Partnership with the States and Territories to tackle underachievement in our schools.
There is no ‘one size fits all' answer to school underperformance  -  but we can give schools more control over their performance and more support in achieving better outcomes. 
We can provide more funding and greater discretion to principals and local school communities to address their specific local conditions.
That is why, beginning next year, this National Policy Partnership will contain measures to help:
     * attract high performing principals and teachers to underperforming schools;
     * provide funding for intensive learning activities and additional coaching for those students who are falling behind;
     * create robust networks of parents, other schools, local communities and businesses to help students in transitioning successfully to work or further education; and
     * to provide incentives for individual schools to extend their reach through longer opening hours, after-school study support, sports and other activities to help keep students engaged in their studies.
To make a real difference, we anticipate that governments will need to commit to additional investments of around $500,000 per year for an average sized school.
This funding should target areas where intensive learning support can make the greatest difference to student outcomes  -  like early intervention and support for children with developmental challenges. 
I want to see these resources beginning to be deployed in our most disadvantaged schools within the next 12 months.
The measures that I have outlined today will involve a lot of public debate in the period ahead.
But I intend to take these measures to COAG for agreement by year's end.
In the meantime, the Deputy Prime Minister and I will be spending a lot of time talking to parents, a lot of time talking to teachers, a lot of time talking to students, business partners and unions around the country. This is serious business we are talking about here today.
The measures I have announced today are the next step in delivering on our education revolution.
They are designed to reform our school system for the better.
They are designed to bring about better teaching, better school leadership and better results for schools in disadvantaged areas. 
All these changes are likely to cost money and that is where we will have a significant, significant negotiation with the States.
I know it's sometimes difficult to accept change when you're battling against the odds trying to help on the ground society's underachievers.
But I want people to understand that our reforms are essential to Australia's future  -  because quality education is good for our economy, good for our community and good for individuals. It will help create jobs and higher wages, and will create better opportunities for all Australians.
The Government wants the next generation of Australians to be the best educated, best skilled, best trained in the world.
We don't apologise for this ambition.
Today, we take one further practical step towards achieving the education revolution that Australia needs.
One step further to building a stronger, fairer and more secure Australia, and one capable of handling the great challenges of the 21st century that now lie before us.
I thank you.


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
I'm delighted to join you for the Australian Industry Group's National Dinner tonight and address you for the first time as Prime Minister of Australia.
I'm especially delighted to join you as you celebrate the ten year anniversary of the formation of the Australian Industry Group, through the merger of the ancient factions of the old Metal Trades Industry Association and the Australian Chamber of Manufactures.
The companies represented by Ai Group are strong contributors to Australian economic growth and employment, and we value your role in building the nation's prosperity.
Like its predecessors, the Ai Group has enjoyed a strong relationship with both sides of politics.
I would particularly like to acknowledge the strong and independent contribution to national policy debate made by Ai Group's CEO, Heather Ridout.
We appreciate Heather's constructive input, in particular through Infrastructure Australia, Skills Australia and our Business Advisory Group on workplace relations.
Sometimes Ai Group agrees with the Government.
Sometimes they disagree.
But consistently, we enjoy a genuine constructive engagement.
Tonight I want to discuss how the Australian Government is responding to the challenging set of global economic conditions that we now confront.
It is now a little over nine months since the Government came to office.
The Government's overall plan is to build a stronger, fairer and more secure Australia, to help working families, pensioners and carers facing financial pressures and to prepare Australia for the new challenges of the 21st century.
In the nine months since taking office, we've brought we've down our first Budget, begun our program of national economic reform, and put forward our framework to act on Australia's long-term challenges  -  including climate change.
The Government has come to office at a time when we are facing some of the most challenging global economic conditions in almost a quarter century.
The global financial turmoil of the past 12 months is leading to a deceleration in growth all across the developed world.
Six of the world's seven largest development economies have recorded zero or negative growth in their most recently-reported quarters (Japan, Germany, the UK, Canada, France and Italy).
At the same time, inflation is rising and the global economy has seen the greatest oil price shock in more than thirty years.
Industrialised economies have seen inflation almost double in the past year, from an average of 2¼ per cent to 4 per cent.
Globally, share markets in developed economies have fallen by an average of around 20 per cent. Our own stock market is also down by around 20 per cent since the beginning of the year. 
Around the world, we are witnessing decade lows in consumer confidence  -  with the lowest confidence levels since the early 1990s in the US and the UK.
The Government moved quickly to respond to the challenges posed by the global credit crisis  -  dealing with the immediate challenges, such as liquidity in our national financial markets through our actions in the public bond market, and through the coordination of global regulatory responses to the crisis through the International Monetary Fund, the Financial Stability Forum and the G20.
The uncertain global environment has created tough conditions for many Australian businesses, as the latest Performance Indices from the AiGroup for manufacturing, construction and services have shown.
The high value of the Australian dollar has also put great pressure on many exporters  -  at a time when competition from nations like China and India is increasingly fierce.
Despite all of these economic challenges and the requirement on us all to face up to them, we should never lose sight of the great strengths of the Australian economy.
Australia is better placed than most countries to negotiate the impact of the global economic downturn  -  although let us be realistic, there will be a number of significant bumps along the road.
Last week we learned that Australian businesses are planning to lift capital expenditure to a record $100 billion in 2008-09, with a 5.7 per cent increase recorded in the June quarter.
Here in our own region, developing economies continue to grow, demand for our commodities is strong, and prices for our commodities are at generational highs.
The 50-year highs in the terms of trade are resulting in extra income flowing into the economy and fuelling strong investment.
Indeed, the June quarter balance of payments today recorded the greatest quarterly improvement in the current account deficit since records began in 1959.
Despite difficult global conditions, many Australian businesses are still thriving, and for many their greatest challenge is still to manage growth successfully. 
As we look ahead to 2020 and beyond, there are strong grounds for optimism and confidence in our future.
The Australian Government is committed to steering Australia through tough global economic times to ensure our economy emerges in strong shape.
We have delivered responsible economic management, with a conservative Budget grounded in a $22 billion surplus.
The surplus was designed to put maximum downward pressure on inflation and interest rates.
The Government has also begun to embark upon the most comprehensive microeconomic reform program that Australia has seen since the early 1990s.
In recent years productivity growth has declined sharply  -  from average annual growth of 3.3 per cent during the productivity cycle of the mid-1990s, to just 1.1 per cent in the current cycle.
That productivity slowdown reflects the long-term neglect of investing in the drivers of productivity  -  our workforce and our infrastructure.
We must turn that around  -  because in the long term it is productivity growth that will build our future living standards.
Over the last 40 years, productivity growth has accounted for more than 80 per cent of the improvement in Australia's living standards. 
The Government is committed to building our long-term prosperity by investing in five key platforms for future productivity growth  -  education, infrastructure, innovation, business deregulation and taxation reform.
We have laid out an education revolution for Australia's future  -  ranging through early childhood education, school, vocational education, universities and research.
In our first Budget we allocated $19.3 billion to the Education Revolution over the next four years to help deliver:
     * a national curriculum for all students in English, maths, the sciences and history;
     * guaranteed funding to both Government and non-Government schools alike;
     * a $1.2 billion Digital Education Revolution that over time will provide access to a computer for every student in years 9 -12;
     * a $2.5 billion Trade Training Centre program across Australia to help provide robust trade skills for students and keep them engaged in schooling, and
     * 630,000 training places over five years through our Productivity Places Program.
On infrastructure, we have begun our reform program by establishing a Infrastructure Australia to help drive investment in critical national infrastructure such as road, rail, ports and high speed broadband.
On innovation, the Government is already rolling out the Enterprise Connect network I first announced at the Ai Group national forum last year  -  a network that links small and medium-sized businesses to ideas, technologies and infrastructure.
Up to the middle of last month, more than 900 firms had received or applied for Enterprise Connect services.
The Government is building a 21st century innovation-driven industry policy - not the old industry policy based on protection and resisting change, but the 21st century innovation policy that embraces change, productivity and global markets.
On deregulation, we have made significant progress in reinvigorating the Council of Australian Governments with a major reform agenda, including a list of 27 areas of regulatory reform for building a seamless national economy.
We have established the Henry Commission as the starting point for long-term reform of tax, welfare and retirement incomes.
We are working to expand access to overseas markets for Australian businesses  -  as a strong supporter of the Doha Round at the WTO, as well as making progress on free trade agreements in our region.
The Trade Minister, Simon Crean, has also concluded negotiations for the region-wide ASEAN-Australia-New Zealand Free Trade Agreement.
This is the largest FTA that we have ever negotiated  -  covering 16 per cent of our trade in goods and services, worth $71 billion.
ASEAN is an enormous market of 570 million people with a combined GDP of more than 1 trillion US dollars.
The ASEAN-Australia-New Zealand market will have a combined GDP of 2.3 trillion US dollars, which is more than twice as large as India - at 1.1 trillion US dollars - and nearly three-quarters the size of China's 3.3 trillion dollar economy. 
We will also support our exporters.
Tomorrow, Trade Minister Simon Crean will receive a high-level review into Australia's Export Policies and Programs and we look forward to examining its recommendations.
We're also consulting widely on the design of our Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, that will help drive our long-term transformation to a low carbon economy.
However tonight, I would like to focus on the role of nation-building infrastructure in building a stronger Australian economy.
This Government is committed to implementing the single largest infrastructure program in the history of the Commonwealth.
This Government believes in nation building.
That's why the Government is investing in a nation building plan of some $76 billion.
We stand in the great tradition of nation-building Labor Governments that laid the foundations for the prosperity enjoyed by successive generations of Australians:
     * The Labor Governments that built post-war infrastructure, training and housing programs for the returning service men and women  -  as well as the massive Snowy Mountains Hydroelectric Scheme. 
     * The Labor Government that help build the urban infrastructure needed for the sprawling suburbs that grew up on the outskirts of our cities in the 1970s.
     * The Labor Government that began a national investment in our railway infrastructure in the 1990s.
Now, as a new century stretches before us, we must build the infrastructure for a new century and the needs of a rapidly changing world.
Our job isn't just to maintain what was built in the past.
We must build new infrastructure for the 21st century:
     * 21st century highways, to help get working parents out of traffic jams and home to their families more quickly.
     * 21st century ports, to get our exports to their markets without delay.
     * 21st century broadband, to drive a digital revolution for our schools, hospitals, small businesses and regional communities.
     * 21st century public transport, giving Australian families more transport options than relying on the car.
     * 21st century power stations, as we transition to a low carbon economy.
     * 21st century water infrastructure, so we no longer waste this precious national asset.
     * 21st century schools, to give kids the world class education for the jobs of the future.
     * 21st century hospitals, to give families the quality health care they deserve.
This is a vision that takes us beyond the necessary arithmetic of the Budget.
Beyond necessary tax reform.
Beyond the necessary regulatory reform to create a seamless national economy.
Beyond the predictable economic terrain.
Beyond all of that, to a new program of nation-building  -  but this time in partnership with the private sector.
We need as a nation to have about us the national imagination to look beyond the horizon.
Not just to hope that infrastructure might materialise.
But to plan for it.
If we look at many of our major cities, they cry out for better long-term infrastructure planning.
Not just for greater convenience.
Not just for greater amenity.
But critically as new generators of 21st century economic activity, where functioning cities are essential to our economic future.
Beyond the cities, our wider national economic infrastructure must function properly as well.
In the long-term, this will underpin productivity, competitiveness, exports and prosperity.
And it will help drive economic growth in times of global uncertainty.
In just nine months of Government, we have committed to a $76 billion infrastructure investment program, allocating funds for transport, utilities, communications, and social infrastructure.
We'll invest $26 billion in roads and rail infrastructure through 2008-09 to the end of AusLink II.
We'll invest $20 billion through the Building Australia Fund in transport, energy and water priorities.
And from this, we'll invest almost $5 billion in a National Broadband Network.
We have yet to imagine properly the full transformational economic potential of a 21st century cutting edge high speed broadband network  -  the ultimate technological capacity to bring markets closer and to finally overcome the tyranny of distance that has been Australia's lot since the earliest days of European settlement.
We'll also invest $15 billion in education infrastructure, through the Education Investment Fund, trade training centres in schools, computers in our classrooms, and by investing in our universities.
We'll invest $11 billion health and hospitals infrastructure, through the Health and Hospitals Fund and other programs.
Through these investments, we are building the foundations of the nation's future prosperity.
We're already rolling up our sleeves and starting on projects right now:
     * We are turning soil, mixing concrete and upgrading the Ipswich Motorway in Brisbane.
     * We have funded 896 schools to plug in 116,000 computers and get students connected.
     * We have funded 100 schools to start planning and building their new Trades Training Centres.
We've already established Infrastructure Australia to audit the nation's infrastructure needs and development a national priority list.
And we've already begun work to reform infrastructure sectors, through national heavy vehicle regulations, better rail safety laws, and developing national guidelines for public private partnerships.
Infrastructure policy is a national priority for this Government because infrastructure constraints have been holding back our economy for too long.
Infrastructure constraints are a drag on economic growth, they hold back productivity, they add to inflationary pressures, and they part of the reason we saw ten consecutive interest rate rises under the previous Government.
The cost to the economy of inadequate infrastructure will rise if we do not act now.
According to CEDA, if we can remove infrastructure bottlenecks we can lift our economic performance.
We could potentially raise Australia's GDP by 0.8 percent per year.
We could increase exports by 1.8 per cent, increase business investment by 1.2 per cent, and lower the consumer price index by 3.2 per cent.
But achieving those long term dividends will require investment now  -  and not just from the Commonwealth.
State governments, their corporations, and the private sector also have critical roles to play.
State Governments now have serious, long term capital works programs.
In 2008-09 alone, the Queensland will spend $17 billion; NSW Government will spend $14 billion; Western Australia $8 billion and Victoria $4 billion.
According to ABN Amro, investment in public infrastructure over the next decade will be $380 billion  -  including $255 on economic infrastructure and $125 billion on social infrastructure.
ABN Amro forecasts that some $80 billion of investment in public infrastructure over the next decade will be undertaken through public private partnerships.
This makes the development of national PPP guidelines and rigorous assessment of project contracts absolutely critical.
The National Broadband Network, for which we are currently in a competitive assessment process, could be one of the world's largest ever deals involving the public and private sectors.
Putting Commonwealth, State and private infrastructure activity together, we are looking at a real driver of long term economic growth for Australia.
It is a core part of our vision of Australia's economic future  -  nation-builders, together building a nation.
We do not accept the dogma of the previous Liberal Government that this is not the proper province of the national government.
The Government believes that the tens of billions of dollars of revenue from the mining boom should have been invested in Australia's long-term productivity capacity.
And while those revenues continue to flow, that is what we intend to do.
According the Ai Group's own Construction Outlook, infrastructure and mining-related activity is fuelling engineering and commercial construction work.
Consider that in 2009, private sector construction work is forecast to hit $92 billion  -  double what it was just 5 years ago.
There is big growth in road and rail projects, sewerage and water supply projects, electricity generation projects and mining construction work.
Activity levels are their highest in 16 years.
According to the latest Access Economics Investment Monitor, all up there are currently more than $600 billion worth of projects underway or in planning in Australia.
This is 21st century nation building  -  and a core part of the Government's plan to see Australia through the economic challenges that lie ahead.
The road will not be smooth.
But the road can be navigated by a clear cut plan that sees us to our destination  -  a stronger economy with world class skills and world class infrastructure for the future. 
Building Australia's future prosperity requires strong leadership, responsible economic management and a plan that tackles the nation's long term challenges.
As we move forward, the Government especially values our policy partnership with the AiGroup as a leading voice for Australian business.
Business is a crucial partner if we are to achieve the economic reform that's needed for the nation's future prosperity.
This is a Government that has already demonstrated that it will listen to the business community.
We took on board Ai Group's priorities in framing this year's Budget.
You called for raising investment in education and training  -  and we delivered with our investments in Trades Training Centres and the 630,000 new Productivity Places.
You called for us to deliver on infrastructure  -  and we delivered, with $41 billion allocated to new nation-building investment fund: the new Building Australia Fund, Education Investment Fund and Health and Hospitals Fund.
You called for the implementation of the promised personal income tax cuts  -  and we delivered.
You called for a boost to innovation and export facilitation programs  -  and we've begun that task with the Enterprise Connect network, and we'll be considering further measures following the reviews of the National Innovation System and our Export Policies and Programs.
We have, as one of your own publications noted recently, begun to “join the productivity dots for the Australian economy”.
Many of these challenges have been neglected for a long time by successive governments.
Tackling them successfully will take time.
But one thing is critical  -  that short-term politics doesn't block that long-term plan for the nation.
As a nation we need to look to the long term with ambition, confidence and with determination.
I know that is how the Australian Industry Group approaches the great policy challenges of the future, and I look forward to partnering with you as we carve out a strong economic future for Australia.


Today we gather to commemorate the Battle for Australia.
But before I begin I want to acknowledge our Australian Defence Force personnel who are currently serving in theatres abroad.
We have had news this morning that Australian forces serving in Afghanistan have been engaged again in heavy fighting against the Taliban.
This fighting has seen nine Australian troops injured, some seriously.
Our thoughts and our prayers are with our troops, with their families and their loved ones.
Today as we remember those who gave their all for this nation in the past, let us also remember those who continue to give their all for the nation today.
On this day, the 3rd of September, in 1939, Prime Minister Robert Menzies declared war on behalf of Australia on Germany.
On this day, the 3rd of September, in 1942, with John Curtin as Prime Minister, Australian and American forces were heavily engaged in the Battle of Milne Bay  -  a Battle that was soon to become the first defeat of Japanese forces on land and a turning point in the war in the Pacific.
The third of September therefore has particular significance in our nation's story.
For nearly a century now we have commemorated ANZAC Day as the great commemorative event to honour those who gave their all in war.
For nearly a century we have also celebrated Remembrance Day as the end of that bloodiest of wars.
But in the more than half a century since the end of the war that came to our own shores, we have yet to determine a day to commemorate those who came to the defence of Australia itself.
And today as a nation we settle that question.
For today, as a nation, for the first time we officially commemorate the first Wednesday in September as the day to remember the Battle for Australia following the official proclamation of this day by His Excellency the Governor-General in June this year.
The day when we together with our American ally began to turn the tide of the war in the Pacific.
The day when we honour specially those who gave their all in the defence of Australia itself.
We commemorate a time when our nation itself was under attack.
We commemorate a time when a young nation found its very survival at risk.
We commemorate a time when the Australian mainland and Australian cities were themselves under attack.
When one million Australians served in uniform to protect their country.
When a further six million Australians were mobilised.
When thousands, tens of thousands lost their lives in neighbouring nations, on the seas, in the air, and on Australian soil. 
The bombing of Darwin.
The attack on Broome.
The Battle of the Coral Sea.
On the Kokoda Trail.
At the Battle of Milne Bay.
The Battle of Guadalcanal.
The Battle of the Bismarck Sea.
The Battle of the Beachheads  -  at Buna, and Gona and Sanananda.
The death march at Sandakan.
And this bloody list goes on.
We know that some question whether there was indeed a Battle for Australia.
And yes, there's fertile ground for historical debate on the views of Curtin and Churchill, the plans of the Japanese Imperial Army and the Imperial Navy, and what might have happened had the Japanese advance not been stopped at Milne Bay and Imita Ridge.
But on this there can be no doubt:
Never in our history was our nation so threatened.
Never in our history was our future less certain.
Never in our history was our determination to defend ourselves so fully tested.
From the factories to the Volunteer Defence Corps, the air raid shelters and the barbed wire across the beaches.
We'll never know what success by the enemy might have meant for Australia  -  invasion, occupation or isolation.
But we know that Australian soldiers at Milne Bay brought those forces their first defeat on land in the entire Pacific war.
And we know it was from then that the course of the war began to change.
We struggle today to understand just how serious Australia's situation was in 1942.
The impregnable fortress of Singapore had fallen.
Over 15,000 Australians had become prisoners of war.
Prime Minister Curtin understood the threat.
On the day that Singapore fell, he warned:
 “The fall of Singapore can only be described as Australia's Dunkirk ... [The] fall of Dunkirk initiated the battle for Britain. The fall of Singapore opens the Battle for Australia.”
So said Curtin. And Curtin added:
“What the battle for Britain required, so the battle for Australia requires.  That meant service and struggle and complete devotion for Britons in the defence of Britain.  It means the same thing for Australians for the defence of Australia.” 
This was a battle that would involve all Australians.
A fight for survival itself.
The imminent threat was brought home just days later when Darwin was bombed.
Curtin described it as the first “physical contact of war within Australia”.
He called on Australians to:
“vow that this blow at Darwin and the loss it has involved and the suffering it has occasioned shall gird our loins and nerve our steel”.
But the Japanese imperialist forces kept advancing.
Islands continued to fall.
The Americans withdrew from the Philippines.
The advance reached Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands and Timor.
As the southward march continued, the myth of the invincibility of the Japanese Imperial Forces grew.
In May 1942 at the Battle of the Coral Sea, American and Australian ships and our air forces fought side-by-side against a Japanese flotilla that was part of the strategy to take Port Moresby and isolate Australia from our allies.
There were losses on both sides, but Port Moresby never fell.
It was a sign of things to come.
When speaking in Parliament of the Battle of the Coral Sea, Prime Minister Curtin called on all Australians to join in the war effort. He said:
 “Men are fighting for Australia today; those who are not fighting have no excuse for not working.”
This was for Australia, total war.
As Curtin had said to the Americans in March:
“out of every ten men in Australia, four are wholly engaged in war as members of the fighting forces or making the munition and equipment to fight with... The proportion is now growing every day.”
As our men fought along the Kokoda Track, the men and women at home were hard at work in support.
As our airmen fought in the skies of the Pacific the population at home was devoted to production and the civil defence effort.
As our sailors sought to claw back control of the oceans the population at home continued to sign up for the war.
And then there came a day when the news from the frontline changed.
When the myth of the invincibility was stripped away from the advancing enemy forces  -  at the Battle of Milne Bay.
Both sides in the Pacific War recognised the importance of Milne Bay.
It offered a sheltered harbour on the south-eastern tip of Papua New Guinea.
Whoever controlled Milne Bay would have a strong position to defend Port Moresby and the waters around.
From 1942, the Allies developed airfields there.
But the advancing Japanese forces set their sights on Milne Bay too, as a crucial stepping stone to Port Moresby.
In August of 1942, they attacked at Milne Bay.
Their initial progress was rapid.
But when they reached the edge of the airfield, they were stopped.
Then they were then pushed back, pursued - and eventually they fled.
At Milne Bay, Australian and American soldiers  -  working side by side  -  proved they could stop the Japanese imperial forces.
The impact on morale was enormous.
After seeing Malaya, then Singapore and then a string of islands fall, the Allies had now seen their troops turn back the advancing army on land.
It was in every respect, a turning point.
And that is why we mark Battle for Australia Day on the first Wednesday of September, commemorating this great victory at Milne Bay.
There are many stories of bravery that can be told about Australian soldiers, sailors and airmen during the Battle for Australia.
I want to mention just one today.
In commemorating the Battle for Australia in the years ahead, the nation will have the chance to hear many, many more stories, and so they should.
The Royal Australian Air Force played a critical role in supporting the troops at Milne Bay.
At Milne Bay the RAAF's 76 Squadron was led by Keith ‘Bluey' Truscott.
Truscott was one of Australia's best-known flying aces during the Second World War.
Before the war he had been a well known Aussie Rules player.
He had played in Melbourne's 1939 Premiership team. We all make mistakes.
In fact he was nominated as one of the best on the ground and finished the match with two goals.
But like so many young Australians, then and since, he answered the call to arms.
He enlisted in the RAAF in 1940 and, after training, he joined the war in Britain.
In 1941 and 1942 he flew and fought over the skies of Europe.
And, by the time he returned to Australia in early 1942, he was a decorated hero who had destroyed at least 11 German aircraft over Europe.
Truscott deployed to Milne Bay with Number 76 Squadron in August 1942  -  just before the Japanese landing.
And the Squadron flew out of Milne Bay throughout the conflict.
In terrible weather, on metal landing strips that were slippery and dangerous, the aircrews of 75 and 76 Squadrons flew “beyond the point of exhaustion” in support of the ground forces.
They flew so much and fired so many rounds in support of the ground forces that the barrels of the guns on their aircraft were worn smooth from the number of rounds that were fired.
The aircraft would land, refuel, re-arm and immediately take to the skies again  -  day after day after day.
Bluey Truscott, the other pilots and the ground crews showed the sort of dedication that was required to turn the tide in this great Battle for Australia.
Their commitment to the task was the equal of any unit throughout the war.
And to people like them and thousands more, we as a nation, owe a profound debt of gratitude.
There are many such heroes in the Battle for Australia.
Heroes of battle.
And heroes on the home front as well.
One of those was John Curtin.
Like Churchill and Franklin Delano Roosevelt, he was an outstanding leader of a democracy who rose to the occasion when he needed to serve the nation.
He poured himself out in the defence of our nation.
He drove himself to exhaustion and ultimately, of course, to an early death, just months before the war ended. 
General Douglas Macarthur gave Curtin this remarkable tribute in 1945:
 “He (Curtin) was one of the greatest wartime statesmen, and the preservation of Australia from invasion will be his immemorial monument.”
Today, we commemorate the spirit of Curtin and all of those who served in this nation's defence in the Pacific during our nation's darkest time.
Today, we carve a date in the nation's calendar  -  the first Wednesday of every September  -  to remember this Battle for Australia.
To remember a time when our nation was in peril.
And to remember those who answered the call of their nation and risked their lives to defend the nation.
British children learn their nation's finest hour was when their troops stood alone against Hitler in 1940.
And Americans learn that their Greatest Generation was the men who took Normandy in 1944 and Iwo Jima in 1945.
It's time all Australians knew more about 1942.
Every year we remember the events at Anzac Cove that are etched so deep in our national memory.
It's often said, at Gallipoli our nation was born.
But at the Battle for Australia, our nation stood up and confirmed that we as a nation, would endure.
And that's why we have come here today to remember Battle for Australia Day.
We remember that freedom is always purchased by sacrifice.
And that liberty can only be guaranteed by courage.
On Bluey Truscott's grave in the Perth War Cemetery are the following words:
“In loving memory of our darling Keith, his duty nobly done.”
Today we honour all those who served and sacrificed their lives in the Battle for Australia, their duty was nobly done.


We are here today to bring together two important strands of Australian history  -  the place of Gallipoli in our history and the original vision for our Bush Capital.
The Battle of Lone Pine, like the story of Simpson and his donkey, is a part of our national history.
And the story of how the Lone Pine came to Australia, too, is worth mentioning.
93 years ago the Battle of Lone Pine left around 9,000 soldiers lying dead.
The ridge on which this battle took place had had every tree cut down to cover trenches.
Every tree except one  -  the Lone Pine.
The vision of a lonely tree, silhouetted against the sky as the Australian troops looked up at their objective, evokes much of the hardship of the Gallipoli campaign.
After the battle, at least a couple of Australian soldiers souvenired pine cones as mementoes from the battleground.
And a seed from one of these  -  the one that Lance Corporal Benjamin Smith of the 3rd Battalion whose brother had died in the battle  -  finally made it to the grounds of the War Memorial in 1934.
1934 was a year of great events to commemorate Gallipoli.
It was also the year that Turkey's leader, Kemal Ataturk, offered solace to the parents of those young Australians who lost their lives at Gallipoli saying, “After having lost their lives on this land they have become our sons as well.”
The memory of Gallipoli  -  symbolised for us in the Lone Pine and the many trees that have grown from it  -  is important to all of us; the people from Australia, from New Zealand and from Turkey alike.
While battles raged on the Gallipoli Peninsula, so too they raged in Canberra.
But the battles in Canberra were, of course, of a very different nature.
They were the battles between architects, designers, officials and politicians about the face and soul of our national capital.
These too were hard fought battles.
Walter Burley Griffin was committed to bringing about his vision for Canberra.
A vision that he saw as embodying the spirit of the new nation of Australia and the “bold and radical steps in politics and economics” that the young nation had dared to take.
Part of his original vision was for an International Arboretum at West Lake.
An arboretum that would represent the continents of the earth through its trees.
Today  -  nearly 100 years later  -  we are seeing that vision realised.
It is a vision that has had many setbacks along the way  -  including the terrible fires of 2003.
But today we can celebrate the bringing together of two great stories in our history.
One, the story of sacrifice on the Gallipoli Peninsula and the birth of a nation under the fire of shot and shell.
The other, the birth of the nation's capital and the vision of its designer.
It is a great pleasure to be here today to help plant Lone Pine saplings in the new Canberra International Arboretum and Gardens.
And it is a particularly great pleasure to be able to do so alongside the representatives of New Zealand and Turkey.
Thank you.


Your Excellencies, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. On this historic day, I acknowledge the first Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
We are here today to celebrate two great continuities.
A continuity that is embodied in the ancient culture of Aboriginal Australia and the continuity that exists also in our modern constitutional arrangements.
Thank you very much for that welcome to country. This is the first time we have had a welcome to country on behalf of the Ngunnawal people as part of the official swearing in ceremonies associated with the installation of a new Governor-General. And this is a good thing.
Of course there is one other historic thing about today's proceedings, the first time in the 107-year history of our Federation we are also swearing in a truly wonderful woman as Australia's Governor-General. It took us 107 years but we got there in the end.
There could be no person more qualified to assume that honour than Her Excellency Ms Quentin Bryce. Her Excellency is Australia's 25th Governor-General.
She will bring a very special touch to the office of Governor-General just as she has to the office of the Governor of Queensland.
Her Excellency was appointed in July 2003 as the 24th Governor of Queensland. She has been an inspiring Governor and has served the people of Queensland with great distinction.
But of course her service to the community goes back long before her appointment to the office of Governor.
She has an outstanding record of service to the entire Australian community. Ms Bryce has enjoyed a rich and dynamic career as a lawyer, as an academic, as a senior public office holder.
Her roles in the past have included Federal Sex Discrimination Commissioner, inaugural Director of the Queensland Women's information service and founding Chair and Chief Executive Officer of the National Child Care Accreditation Council.
Your Excellency, your service in your new role will take you to all corners of our great nation.
From our largest cities to our very smallest towns.
From the coast to the deep red centre of this great and ancient continent.
To meet all the people, all the people that make up this great continent and country of ours Australia.
Your Excellency you will share moments of great triumph with the people of Australia and you will be there also in our most difficult times, as assuredly they will also come. In those tough times, the community will call on you for support and for understanding.
It is not always an easy role but it is one of the greatest honours that the nation can bestow on any one of its citizens.
The Office of Governor-General plays an important role in our system of Government.
Both through the formal Constitutional role and through the highly valued role that the Governor-General plays in providing leadership, support and inspiration to our community, our community organisations, our great army of volunteers for the betterment of our nation.
Today we have witnessed the swearing in of a new Governor-General who I am sure will fill both of these roles with dignity, distinction and commitment and with a distinctive Queensland touch.
Your Excellency, you are a truly distinguished Australian.
You will now occupy the most distinguished office in our Australian Constitutional arrangements and we wish you the very best in the new role of leadership you have in this our great land, Australia. 


Thanks very much for that very warm Tassie welcome. In fact everywhere I go these days I seem to be being upstaged by Tasmania. A few months ago it was Ricky Ponting, last week it was Princess Mary.
I half expected to come here to today to find out I had been replaced as the keynote speaker by Peter Hudson.
Proud Queenslanders, who can be here among the proud Tasmanians. Our two great states have helped make this very great Australian nation. If you look at just what we have contributed together. You gave us apples, we give you pineapples. You gave us Ricky Ponting, we have given you (inaudible)
You have given us Princess Mary but we have given you King Wally Lewis. I know it is a different form of football.
But it is great indeed to be back here in Tasmania and to be back here also with Tasmania's brand new Premier David Bartlett.
I take this opportunity to congratulate a new Labor Premier in Australia as well, the Premier of NSW Nathan Rees, and Deputy Premier Carmel Tebbutt. I look forward very much to working with Nathan on the big challenges that we face in Australia's future and we will be doing that soon with Council of Australian Government's.
To Jodie Campbell, Member for Bass, Julie Collins, Member for Franklin, Sid Sidebottom, Member for Braddon, good to have you have back in Parliament Sid. Dick Adams, Member for Lyons, we also have Senator Nick Sherry, Senator Katrina Bilk - who I think has just survived her first fortnight in the Senate - good on you, I thank you very much Katrina. Senator Carol Brown, Senator Kerry O'Brien, Senator Helen Polley, John Dowling the State Secretary, and men and women of the Tasmanian branch of the great Australian Labor Party.
I begin by acknowledging the First Australians on whose land we meet and whose culture we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
I also acknowledge this great branch of the Australian Labor Party. I acknowledge the rank and file members of the Australian Labor Party. I acknowledge the rank and file members of Braddon who delivered Braddon back to the Australian Labor Party.
To rank and file members of Bass who delivered Bass back to the Australian Labor Party and to rank and file members who have also returned to Labor, Denison and Lyons and Franklin.I also want to acknowledge the work of this great state branch as I also acknowledge the work of the men and women of the Australian trade union movement  -  the Your Rights At Work campaign.
Tasmania delivered Federal Labor's highest vote of any State in the nation  -  at 56.2 per cent of the vote, it helped deliver one outcome, and that is to consign the Howard Liberal Government to history.
We, the Labor Party won the national election because we stood for something radically different than the Liberal Party:
They are the party of Work Choices. We are the party to abolish Workchoices.
They are the party which gave us AWAs. We are the party which abolishes AWAs.
They are the party who send our combat troops to Iraq, we are the party in Government who returned our troops from Iraq.
They are the party who refused to ratify Kyoto, we are the party, in our first hour in Government, ratified the Kyoto Protocol
They are the party who denied and who continue to deny the reality of climate change. We are the party who accepts the reality of climate change and agree that we are responsible for acting on climate change.
And remarkably delegates, they are the Party today which still says, when you look at the state of Australia's great inland river system, the Murray Darling System, the Liberal Party says today that climate change has nothing to do with it.
They are in a state of denial now, they have been in a state of denial in the past and they have indicated that they will be in a state of denial in the future on climate change.
Also if you look about the other great differences between what they did in their 12 long years in office and what we have committed to do in our first nine months in office.
They are the party which ripped $1 billion out of the nation's public hospitals. In nine months in office, we have put $1.2 billion back into the public hospitals of Australia.
They are the party who withdrew, literally hundreds and hundreds of millions of dollars from the nation's universities. In our first budget we delivered back an additional half billion dollars to the nation's universities. And so the list goes on.
Whether  it is in health, whether it is in education, whether it is across the entire spectrum, what we saw from that Government after 12 long years in office was this: despite the benefit of the resources boom, despite there being 12 years through which so many of those years delivered enormous increase in the revenue of the commonwealth, their response was, not to invest in the nation's infrastructure, not to invest in the nation's education, not to invest in the nation's health and hospital system, and instead to allow that money to be wasted.
I have news for you delegates, in our nine months in office, we have turned a corner decisively, we will be investors in the nation's future.
I'm delighted today to be here this weekend with Premier David Bartlett  -  leading this Government here in Tasmania.
The Premier understands that absolute central importance of education for this state's future and for this nation's future.
He understands that the best investment we can make is in our people, the next generation of Tasmanians, the next generation of Australians.
He understands that the jobs of the future will be different from the jobs of the past.
And he understands that the economy of the 21st century is an economy built on the education, skills and training of the workforce.
That is why he is the first Premier in fifty years in this State to retain the education portfolio  -  because he wants education to be at the heart of the Tasmanian Government's strategy for the future and I congratulate him on that.
This goes to the heart of the Labor message. The Labor message is that, wherever you are, whatever side of the tracks that you are born on, whether you are rich or poor, whatever part of this country that you come from, that our mission as Labor is to reach out a hand and say, ‘here is a future for you'. Here is a future for you, carved through first class schools, first class preschools, first class TAFE's, first class training institutions, first class universities.
That is the Labor mission from the past, that is the Labor mission for the future - and I welcome Tasmania's participation in it.
Tasmania has also been embracing the economy of the 21st Century, embracing the opportunities of the digital economy, renewable energy, (inaudible) and value adding to your additional industries.
And very soon Tasmania will reach a population passed the half million mark.
I know that the Bartlett government will be a partner in building an innovative 21st Century commonly for Tasmanians. And I look forward as Prime Minister of Australia, of working closely together with the Premier of Tasmania and this Tasmanian Government to forge the future together and we will do that with energy, with vigour and with determination.
It is now a just nine months since the Government, the Australian Labor Government took office.
Since coming to office, we have been prosecuting our long-term program to build a stronger Australia, a fairer Australia, a more secure Australia, to help working families, pensioners and carers facing financial pressures, and to prepare Australia for the challenges of the 21st century.
But our reform agenda has just begun  -  as we build this more secure Australia, this stronger Australia and, fairer Australia and an Australia capable of meeting the challenges of the new century, we are also committed to new ways of engaging the community in different ways as well.
And that is why we as party and we as a movement, must constantly explore and (inaudible) new ways of engaging with the community at the grassroots.  Always keeping in touch, always responding to what the people are saying, that is the message of Labor, that is mission of Labor.
The first priority of government, for the National Government is to protect our nation's security. The security challenges that face Australia are increasingly complex.
The balance of global strategic and economic power is shifting to the Asia-Pacific region. Terrorism continues to pose a threat, and new challenges such as energy security continue to emerge.
The Government is responding to this complex emerging environment by preparing Australia to meet these new national security challenges.
We will strengthen our defence forces for the future, and we will enhance our relations with our friends and allies across the region.
We will also tackle non challenges like terrorism, natural disasters, water scarcity, food scarcity, and energy security.
The Government is delivering on our commitment to build this more secure Australia.
The starting point will be a new national security policy outlined in the near future in a new National Security Statement for the nation. It will be the first time Australia has had a National Security Statement.
We are bringing new rigour to our defence planning through the preparation of a new Defence White Paper. The White Paper will detail the emerging strategic terrain we face and how our policy and defence procurements for the future will respond to that great complex terrain.
And to give our Armed Forces the resources they need to do the job, the Government has committed to provide three per cent real growth in defence spending, not for the next year ahead, not for the next three years ahead, for the next ten years ahead, so that our defence forces can claim certainty for the future, because that is our first responsibility as Government.
We also intend to promote security cooperation in our region. And to do this, we are promoting as a Government a regional dialogue about the future of an Asia-Pacific Community.
We believe we have a simple choice  -  we either try to shape the region, shape the future of our region or allow our region simply to be shaped by events.
So we will continue prosecute an active foreign defence and security policy agenda for the future.
The years of disengaging from the international community for Australia are now over. Australia is back in business. The United Nations, the frame work convention on climate change, dealing with the challenges of global poverty. Dealing with the challenges in our own immediate region in the south-west pacific. Australia is back in business under this Government.
We are again engaging with the world again  -  including through our nomination to the UN Security Council, our commitment to the Millennium Development Goals for the world's poorest people, the establishment of the International Commission for Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament, which is now headed by the former foreign minister Gareth Evans.
And by using Australia's potential for creative middle power diplomacy, we will build and keep building a more secure Australia, and to play our part to do our bit, to deliver a more secure region and a more secure world.
The Government came to office at a time when Australia is facing some of the most challenging global economic conditions in almost a century. We face serious global economic challenges. If you looked at the unfolding of the global financial crisis these last 12 months, it is watched across most economies in the world. Negative growth rates have been generated in Japan, Germany, France and Italy.
Zero growth in the United Kingdom and so the list goes on.
In Australia that economic challenge is compounded by the economic circumstances we inherited and bear these facts in mind. When this government was elected in November last year, we inherited the highest inflation this country has had in sixteen years. We inherited ten interest rate rises in a row. We inherited the second highest interest rates for Australian working families of any developed country in the world.
That was John Howard's and Peter Costello's legacy for Australian working families. When you therefore look at those challenges, those in the global economy and compounded by our local economic circumstances, the Government's course of action has been clear.
One, responsible economic management, anchored in a $22 billion budget surplus. A buffer for the future. Responsible economic management.
Two, a clear economic reform agenda to boost our long term economic productivity growth. And that is through the agency of an education revolution in our schools, in our preschools, in our training places and in our universities. And three, for this nation, under this Government and under this Prime Ministership, to begin the single largest commonwealth government driven nation building program the country has seen, $76 billion.
In the past the attitude of the nation's government under the Liberals and Nationals was this: not our problem, blame somebody else.
If there was a problem with infrastructure don't come up with solutions, just come up with an excuse, that was their attitude. Our attitude is different. If we the national government are the recipient of this great influx of revenue resources from around the world, off the back of the resources boom, you can either do two things with it.
You can waste it on consumption, which is what the Liberals did, or you can invest it in the future, which is what we intend to do. That's the difference. And we are proud of the difference. We are a party and Government of nation building.
When we look at the challenges of broadband, we look at the challenges of our roads, the challenges of our ports, the challenges of our railway system, our attitude is, it is not who do we blame, our attitude is, how do we fix it.
That is the difference. And so our first nine months in office, we have dedicated $76 billion to this great task of nation building, and we intend to get on with the task.$20 billion, Building Australia Fund, $11 billion education investment fund, $10 billion Health and Hospitals Fund, $26 billion through the Auslink roads program and other programs as well. This is just the start.
The people of Australia are looking at their national government and not simply for a litany of excuses, they want instead a program of action. And I say to you delegrates, we in our first nine months have embarked on that course of action. 
We intend to build the nation. We are nation builders by instinct, we are nation builders by instinct, by our history and we will be nation builders for the future.
Those opposite, the Liberals enjoy particularly talking the economy down. I would draw the Liberal's attention to one core fact, in the various data which has been produced on the economy in the last period of time, what the Australian business community is saying about their view of the future.
Last week we learned that Australian businesses are planning to lift capital expenditure to $100 billion for 2008-09.
That is the highest investment level ever, after a very strong 11 per cent increase in the financial year that just ended.
It demonstrates strong confidence in our economy's future.
And there's good reason for that confidence.
We are in the fastest growing region in the world  -  and despite the global slowdown, we are still seeing solid growth in our region.
The latest IMF forecasts predicts 8.4 per cent growth for Asia's developing economies for both 2008 and 2009.
Demand for Australia's commodities remains strong, and prices for our commodities are at generational highs.
The 50-year highs in the terms of trade are resulting in extra income flowing into the economy and fuelling strong investment and export revenue.
Indeed, the balance of payments this week recorded the greatest quarterly improvement in the current account deficit since records began in 1959.
Despite therefore, difficult global conditions, Australian businesses are determined to get on with it. Many are still thriving, and many firms are held back more by a shortage of skilled labour than a shortage of business activity ahead.  
The Australian Government is committed to steering Australia through these tough global economic times to ensure our economy emerges stronger in the long term.
Our strategy of responsible economic management, depends in part on our ability to deliver a strong budget surplus, a buffer for the future, a $22 billion buffer for the future. 
At this last week's in Canberra, when our Senators, including our Tasmanian Senators got to, got up close and personal with those opposite, we saw what the Liberals were really like. We saw what the Liberals were like.
What did the Liberals do in their first major legislative act in the Senate? The Liberals decided that their number one priority was to make sure that Luxury cars would remain affordable. In other words, their number one priority in their legislative action in the Senate was to block an increase in the Luxury Car Tax.
That is their number one priority. So much in touch are they with the needs of working families, pensioners and carers, that their number one priority in the Senate, it's the composition of the new Senate has been to act on the Luxury Car Tax in this way.
Let's go to the money involved: $555 million, half a billion dollars. So what the Liberals are saying is that they will put porches ahead of public transport. They will put Rolls Royces ahead of urban rail. Half a billion dollars to make sure that your Porsche or your Maserati or your Lamborghini, remain affordable.
You know something, I don't think that's what working families are looking for.
Working families want some help, and if half a billion dollars is available through what has been a modest tax increase in this category of vehicles, I say as the head of the Labor Government, we want to dedicate that money to the urban transport needs of working families coming into work.
But what we see from the Liberals, this pattern of behaviour, spreads across their other actions in the Senate as well.
Take the Medicare Levy Surcharge. We have a simple measure announced in the Budget, was to make sure that working families are no longer penalised by the surcharge. Back in 1996, they introduced the surcharge for those earning $50,000, which they defined back then as high income earners.
And guess what, as of 2007 when they lost office, they still defined those earning $50,000  a year as high income earners, because they hadn't changed the surcharge.
Our budget measure was this: it is time to change that to provide people with a decent break.
And so that is our measure before the Senate at the moment, to make sure that those who have to pay that surcharge at present in that $50,000 to $100,000 bracket no longer have to pay that into the future.
And for a working family with a couple of incomes, $60,000 from one $60,000 from another,  you are looking at a potential saving of more than $1000 a year. So in the very week that for the first time in seven years, the Reserve Bank delivers an interest rate cut, the equivalent of which is $600 a year for a person on an average mortgage, the Liberals turn around and say, well here is a $1200 tax bill back on top of that for you.
That's what the Liberals are saying, that is what they are doing, and more importantly, they are committed to do it in the future. I say this to the Liberals as they contemplate their future actions in the Senate: It is time for the Liberal Party of Australia just to get real with the challenges which working families are facing.
They want a help up, they don't want another tax thrown on top of their heads like this one that I have just been talking about.  But it is part and parcel of a pattern of behaviour. Whether it is FuelWatch, whether it is Grocery Choice, whether it is what we are doing with the changes to the Medicare Levy Surcharge.
Whether it is what we were proposing also in other areas of tax. In one areas after another. They are not siding with consumers, they are not siding with working families. The same Liberal Party of Workchoices, the same Liberal Party who constantly is siding with the big end of town as opposed to helping those who need a hand  up.
This Liberal Party earns the Nation's condemnation and you have just seen the first edition of it in the debate we had just now in the Senate on the Luxury Car Tax.
Labor's plans are different. We say to take this revenue, the $6 billion which the Liberals now hold to ransom and say, let's invest that instead in the nation's future. Let us invest it in the urban transport needs of our major cities. Let's invest it in the infrastructure needs of this great state of Tasmania.
Let us make sure that we have a decent telecommunications system, in this great state of Tasmania, lets invest to make sure that happens.
Delegates I spoke before about an education revolution, in our first budget we allocated $19.3 billion to the Education Revolution over the next four years.
We are delivering a national curriculum for all students in English, and maths, the sciences and history  -  and already we have established the National Curriculum Board.
We have guaranteed funding to both Government and non-Government schools alike  -  this year, Tasmanian schools will receive funding of $201 million from the Commonwealth.
We have begun to deliver on our $1.2 billion Digital Education Revolution - Round One of the computers in school program saw funding for 1,047 new computers in 23 schools across Tasmania. That's practical action.
While the Liberals in parliament complain about computers in schools, I have one question back to them, and that is, which of you as liberal members of parliament want to put your hand up and hand the money back from the schools in your area. 
I am yet to hear one say yes. You know why? The P&amp;C's and the P&amp;F's across this country are saying, any practical help to make sure that our kids have the opportunities of the 21st Century education in the classroom is help that is welcome and that they receive positively.
We have begun allocation funding for our $2.5 trades training centre programs in schools. We are funding 630,000 training places over five years through our $1.9 billion investment in the Productivity Places Program.
I welcome the agreement we have reached with the Tasmanian Government just last week to work together in delivering Productivity Places in Tasmania.
That partnership will deliver training places across many Tasmanian industries including the key skills shortage areas in community services and health, in manufacturing, in construction and electrical trades.
We started this year with 458 new training places in identified skill shortage areas, and we are matching that training closely to industry needs so that businesses have a solution to skill shortages.
Already, 1,030 Tasmanians have commenced training in the Productivity Places Program in occupations such as Community Services Support Work, Security Operations and Asset Maintenance  -  and 300 of these job seekers have completed training. That's practical action. That's practical action for Tasmania, practical action in our first nine months in office.
And I look forward to continuing to work with the Tasmanian Government on strengthening the skills, education and training of the Tasmanian workforce.
This is the practical start, the skeleton, the bones, the flesh the blood of the education revolution, which I am committed to and which your premier is committed to.
And as we seek to build the nation, building together and in this state, 21st century highways, 21st century broadband, 21st century water infrastructure and 21st century hospitals and schools.
In the long term, this is necessary to underpin productivity competitiveness, exports and growth.
I said before delegates that we are committed to a program of nation building. And we see the states as being partners with us in that progress.
But nation building, building for the future, building a stronger economy, building a more secure Australia is an incomplete vision unless we are equally committed to building a fairer Australia, to give every working person a decent go.
And that is why fairness is etched deep into the Labor soul. From our very beginnings, from the earliest days of the 1890's, when this movement of ours was founded and we began operating as a national political party in 1901. If there is one core organising principle of Labor, it is this: to give every person a fair go.
And that is why when the Liberals said that their attitude to a fair go was to impose Workchoices and AWAs. They lost touch totally with the Australian community.
Because in that one act they dropped the fair go and they shredded it, they shredded it. Because at the end of the day, they are not the party of the fair go. They never have been and they never will be. It is not in their DNA. It is in ours and we should be proud of it.
That's why we are building a fair and flexible industrial relations system for the future.
That's why we're delivering tax relief for working families. That's why, in this most recent Budget, we have provided $7.5 billion in additional payments to pensioners and carers and that is why we have young kids going to preschool, increase the childcare tax rebate from 30 per cent to 50 per cent. And that is why if you are educating your kids at school, for the first time in the nation's history, there will now be an education tax refund to help you get a tax rebate for what you invest in your kids' education.
We have also in the (inaudible) fairness, decided to shine a light on the great national obscenity that is homelessness. How is it that this nation of ours in the 21st Century that the (inaudible) can say to us that we have 100,000 Australian out there who cant call the place home.
How could we allow that to happen. I say it is wrong. I say we have got to do something about it. And that is why we have launched the first Green Paper for this Government, in the first month that we were in office, a national paper on homelessness. It will deliver its findings by years' end. And this Government is determined to act.
To act also in partnership with our programs on housing affordability: First Home Saver Accounts, the National Rental Affordability Scheme, the Housing Affordability Fund.
In the past, the Liberals thought so much of housing and housing affordability, they did not even have a Minister for Housing. They did not have a department responsible for housing. They had no housing policies.
In nine months, we have hit the ground running. But we looking forward to the delivery of this White Paper on homelessness, because I believe a mark of a nation's decency, a mark of a people's decency, a mark of our society's decency is looking at a need as acute and as deep as that and saying, ‘we must act'. And act we will.
We have also, as a party and as a Government chosen to shine a light on the great challenge of our age as well which is closing the gap. Closing the gap between Indigenous and non Indigenous Australians.
I do not believe that for us as a party and the Government of the people can stand idly by while the life expectancy gap between indigenous and non indigenous and Australians grows wider as opposed to growing narrower.
How is it that young Aboriginal children under the age of five have three times the mortality rate of non indigenous kids. It is just wrong, we have got to do something about it. Closing the gap is one of the hardest commitments this Government has made. We have outlined a timetable for so doing. We are harnessing the resources of Government for so do. We will do so in partnership with the businesses and community organisations across the nation.
But I say to you as delegates of the Australian Labor Conference here in Tasmania, the mark of this Government and this movement must be to deal with this great and enduring challenge to our nation's decency. And we are determined to act.
Delegates, it has been good to be among you today. It has been good to be among you here  in Tasmania. Part of our challenge for Government is not just building a secure Australia, building a stronger Australia, not just to build a fairer Australia, not just to prepare for the great challenges of the future including climate change, it is also to explore together a new way of governing, a new way of engaging in the community. A new way of remaining in touch.
It has been good to see here in Tasmania the new Tasmanian Government beginning to fold out, community cabinets across the Island.
As a national Government we have done this since the beginning of the year. We have had community cabinets now in the Western Suburbs of Sydney, the Southern Suburbs of Perth, we have had them in the centre of Mackay, in North Queensland, we have had them in an Indigenous Community in Yirrkala, in East Arnhem Land.
We have also held them in other parts of the country as well. And what I can say to you today and confirm is that before years' end, we will be bringing the entire cabinet here, to Tasmania as well.
For the first time in ten years, the Australian cabinet is coming to town and it is coming here to Launceston. And next year, the entire cabinet is coming back to town, we are going to the south of the island.
And the year after that we are going to the north west. It is part of the community engaging the cabinet. It is part of the community engaging the Government. There is no better discipline for the soul, for some of the mandarins that work in the commonwealth public service to sit down across a table, with representatives of local community organisations and find out just what it is like.
It is part of a new way of governing. And we intend to do that, and to keep doing it.
Delegates, as Governments we can never afford to lose touch with the community.
None of us in Government can ever taker the community for granted. None of us in Government can ever lose touch with the community. None of us in Government can ever become detached from what the people are saying because the people are very tough task masters and it is right that they are tough task masters. Because in Government they give us their trust to deliver for them. To deliver for them, in what is needed now and to deliver for them, leadership for the great challenges of the future. And that is our challenge.
Friends, It has been an honour to among you today because you are the heart and soul of our movement. Each and every one of you. Today I have met so many of you as I came into the building. I met the missos, I met many missos, more missos than I could poke a stick at. I met members of other unions as well.
And I thank you again for you work with Your Rights at Work. Each and every one of you. I met also, those of you who work in local councils. I met also, a woman who works on council up in Georgetown, who said something really interesting to me. She said that why she was in the business of local government was to respond to what, to use her term, the local people, those who see themselves of little people, need.
I think there is something in that for us. Always to bear in mind what it is like when you are doing it really, really tough.
I also met today representatives of (inaudible), out there doing the hard work of recruiting. Keep at it, each and every one of you.
We constantly must rejuvenate our movement, we must constantly rejuvenate by bringing you people in. The values of which we stand are ancient and continuing and they are good values because we stand for the fair go.
But we must always be rejuvenated by people who come afresh to join our ranks and that is where your task comes in.  
I also met today, the (inaudible) where are they? Hands up. I have never met these folk in my life before, other than to know that they became life members recently. And I heard the story of how Young Labor was formed in Hobart in 1948, 68 years ago.
You know, when I hear stories like that from the local council of Georgetown, from the formation of Young Labor in 1948, to the work on our campuses today, to the work that we see through our great trade unions, it makes me proud to be the leader of this great movement of ours.
Our values are great. Our people are great. Our mission is good. Our determination is strong. Let's go forward to the future, together.


Thank you to the Pacific Area Newspaper Publishers' Association for the invitation today to launch your 39th annual conference.
I've spoken to this conference before.
But this is my first time as Prime Minister.
And I want to congratulate PANPA's ongoing efforts in fostering excellence, innovation and professional development within the newspaper industry  -  for one single reason, and that is, the state of newspapers is central to the health of Australia's democracy. It still remains its principal arteries.
Much has been written about the changing media environment in which you operate.
The media landscape, of which you are an important part, is being transformed as communications become more diffuse.
This is having a profound impact on your profession.
Just as it is having a profound impact on my profession and on the whole way in which we collectively conduct our democracy. 
Consumers' habits are changing as people increasingly access news and information on laptops, Blackberrys and iPhones.
Today there are roughly 80 million blogs, and nearly 200 million people connected through the internet on Facebook and MySpace.
And the corollary of this shift online is a change in the way in which news is created and the way in which news is consumed.
You know better than most that this change represents challenges to traditional media, including newspapers.
The closure of the Bulletin magazine after 128 years and, the Sunday Program after 28 years, are evidence enough of the great changes which are now afoot.
But this doesn't mean abandoning quality journalism, or quality ideas or quality debate.
In fact, I believe today that there is even greater demand for quality news and quality debate.
And that's because our communities, both local and global, are tired of the same old political script.
Our communities, both local and global, are instead looking for new solutions to the new challenges they confront  -  from family disintegration to pressures on local communities, to climate change.
That is why each government must work harder to engage the community directly, rather than governments simply going to the polls every three or four years and then returning to some level of political or community engagement three or four years later. It hasn't worked before. It doesn't work now. It won't work into the future.
Earlier this year we convened the 2020 Summit  -  to get the best ideas on Australia's future from Australians from all walks of life.
Hundreds of submissions were received. Thousands of Australians participated through local school summits, local summits and local community forums.
What struck me was that we had 500 secondary schools across Australia participate in this process -  that is nearly one fifth of the nation's secondary schools  -  and they ran their own local school summits.
Australians at all levels are wanting to participate in a continuing discussion about Australia's future.
We have also for the first time begun holding Community Cabinet meetings across Australia to give people direct access to Cabinet Ministers.
Within the first 12 months of government we will have held Community Cabinet meetings in every State of the nation.
We're learning a lot from these meetings about the day to day concerns of Australians.
The challenges of raising adult children with profound disabilities.
The challenges of living on the single age pension.
The challenge of getting to work without proper public transport.
The challenge of climate change to our farmers and the river systems on which they have depended for more than a century and on which they can no longer depend.
Community engagement also requires a practical response.
Both now and most critically, for the long term.
That's why, for example, we will respond to each and every one of the recommendations brought forward at the 2020 Summit as promised, by year's end.
Saying yes to things we can do.
Saying no to those things that we can't do  -  and explaining why.
As well as indicating those things that will need more work.
This I would argue is part of a continuing dialogue between the Government and the community which we represent and therefore our intention is to conduct our relationship with the Australian people in this way.
Today I want to discuss the core objectives of the Government and the policy agenda we have embarked upon to achieve them - including our agenda for a revolution in Australian education.
Australia, like other nations, faces tough times ahead because of the state of the global economy and the challenges of a rapidly changing world. 
That is why the Government has a plan to build a more secure Australia, a stronger Australia and a fairer Australia - to see Australia through the challenging times that lie ahead.
That means tackling long term challenges  -  not just putting them off into the never never.
That also means doing what can practically be done to help working families, pensioners and carers in the here and now.
Australia faces new national security challenges ahead, some of which will require new responses.
That is why the Government has a plan to strengthen our defence force for the future, enhance our relations with our friends and allies and tackle new longer term challenges for our nation, like energy security. 
We are already bringing new rigour to our defence planning through the preparation of a new Defence White Paper.
We have committed to give our Armed Forces the resources they need to do the job, by providing 3 per cent real growth in defence spending for the full decade ahead.
We are combining this commitment of resources with a new strategic foundation for our defence planning.
The starting point will be a new national security policy outlined in the near future in a National Security Statement which will be released to the Parliament in the near future.
It will be the first time Australia has had an integrated National Security Statement.
We are also working to strengthen our alliance with the United States and to build our security cooperation with regional partners including Japan, the Republic of Korea, Indonesia, Malaysia and Singapore  -  all of whom I have visited during our first six months in office.
We are also re-building our relationship with the Pacific Island countries to begin to turn around decades of strategic drift.
To help shape the future of our wider region, we have also begun a regional dialogue about an Asia-Pacific Community for the future  -  to begin to foster a culture and to fashion an institution to encourage the habits of security cooperation not confrontation.
And we are engaging again with the wider world  -  including through our nomination to the UN Security Council, our commitment to the Millennium Development Goals for the world's poorest nations, and the establishment of the International Commission for Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament and our ratification of Kyoto.
We believe we have a simple choice - either we try to shape our regions and our world order or we simply allow our region and our world to be shaped indiscriminately by events. That's the stark choice.
For these reasons, the Government intends to prosecute an activist foreign policy, an activist defence policy and an activist security policy for the future.
We are re-engaging with the international community by deploying Australia's potential for creative middle power diplomacy - to enhance our long term security and that of our wider region.
Our second core priority as a Government is to build a stronger Australian economy.
Australia, like other nations, faces tough economic times because of the state of the global economy.
That is why the Government is committed to responsible economic management anchored in a strong budget surplus.
That is also why the Government has a plan to boost long-term productivity growth through a comprehensive economic reform program.
That reform plan starts with an education revolution with the long-term objective of building in this country the best educated, best trained, best skilled workforce anywhere in the world.
That must be our ambition as a nation.
Our reform plan also includes a $76 billion nation-building plan to tackle the nation's infrastructure bottlenecks, the single biggest nation-building plan in our country's history.
The Government came to office at a time when Australia was facing some of the most challenging global economic conditions in almost a quarter century.
In the past year:
     * A global financial crisis has been triggered by a wave of defaults in the US housing market, with the most recent manifestation of the crisis being the takeover by federal regulators of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac which together hold about $5.4 trillion of debt, around half of the United States' entire mortgage debt.
     * The global economy has seen the greatest oil price shock in more than thirty years.
     * Industrialised nations have seen inflation almost double.
     * Five out of the seven largest industrialised economies have experienced zero or negative growth in recent months.
     * Global share markets have fallen by an average of 20 per cent.
     * Global consumer confidence levels have fallen to their lowest levels since the early 1990s.
We must face these global economic facts. These are tough global economic times.
And Australia is not immune.
But the Government is committed absolutely to steering Australia through these tough economic times to ensure our economy emerges in strong shape for the future.
We have delivered responsible economic management, with a conservative Budget grounded in a $22 billion surplus.
The surplus was designed to put maximum downward pressure on inflation and interest rates  -  to give the RBA maximum room to make interest rate cuts.
The Government has also embarked upon the most comprehensive microeconomic reform program that Australia has seen since the early 1990s.
We are committed to building long term prosperity by investing in five key platforms for future productivity growth:
     * an Education Revolution to which I have referred;
     * a nation-building infrastructure plan including roads, rail, ports and most critically, a national high-speed broadband network;
     * investing also in innovation;
     * creating a seamless national economy through an ambitious program of business deregulation, and
     * long term tax reform.
We have laid out an Education Revolution for Australia's future - ranging through early childhood education, school education, vocational education and training, universities and research.
The Education Revolution isn't a slogan, it is a driving vision for the Government.
It's at the heart of building a 21st century economy.
Australia can't compete against the rest of the world by driving down wages and conditions.
The low-cost economies of our region can always beat us at that game.
And we can't expect our resources sector alone to shoulder the burden of building our future prosperity.
We must invest in knowledge and the knowledge-based industries for the future.
In our first Budget we allocated nearly $20 billion to the Education Revolution over the next four years.
We have begun allocating funding from our $2.5 billion Trades Training Centres program for Australian secondary schools, our $1.2 billion digital education revolution for Australian secondary schools as well.
And we are working for the first time in the country's history on a national school curriculum covering English, maths, the sciences and history.
We are funding 630,000 training places for the Skilling Australia for the Future program.
And investing an additional half a billion dollars from our first Budget to begin rebuilding our university infrastructure.
The Government's commitment to the Education Revolution is matched by our commitment to nation-building infrastructure.
The Government's nation-building program is now in motion.
In just nine months, we have committed $76 billion in these critical areas of infrastructure bottleneck.
These long-term investments will help build the foundations of the nation's future prosperity.
On the deregulation agenda, through the Council of Australian Governments which has come back to life, we are working on 27 areas of regulatory reform with the single objective of building a seamless national economy.
It's time for the Federation to enter the 21st century.
I will work with every State and Territory Government towards that goal and I don't intend to allow politics to get in the way.
Finally, we have established the Henry Commission as the starting point for long-term reform of the tax, welfare and retirement income system - another crucial element in building a stronger Australian economy for the future.
As well as the challenge of building a stronger Australia, the Government is committed to ensuring that all Australians can participate in an inclusive society.
The Government believes passionately in a fair go for all, based on equality of opportunity, a humane safety net and acting on entrenched disadvantage in new ways. 
We're delivering on our commitment to tax relief for working families, with a $46.7 billion tax package, a $4.4 billion Education Tax Refund, the first in the country's history, to help with the kids' education and an increase in the Child Care Tax Rebate from 30 to 50 per cent.
We've also provided $7.5 billion in additional payments to pensioners and carers in the Budget and begun a detailed review of retirement incomes with a view to placing pensioners on a more secure footing for the future.
The Government has also begun to act on the homelessness agenda with the first White Paper on homelessness in our nation's history.
It is for me, simply obscene that in a country as wealthy as this, we still have according to Census date, 100,000 Australians who can still call no place home. It is time we put a stop to that.
The package of housing affordability measures is also now being implemented, including our First Home Saver Accounts to provide concessional taxation treatment for young Australians saving for their first home.
The Government has also committed to closing the gap with Indigenous Australians, including through our support of the Employment Covenant initiated by Andrew Forrest and other Australian employers, to generate tens of thousands of new opportunities for employment for Indigenous Australians.
As well as meeting the challenges of building a more secure, stronger and fairer Australia today, the Government also recognises that Australia must prepare now for the challenges of the future. 
What will be the shape of China, what will be the shape of India, what will be the shape of the Asia Pacific region. And how does Australia carve intelligently its future in the midst of this ocean of change.
Like other nations, Australia faces long-term challenges, including climate change and water, the ageing of our population and long-term food and water supply.  
That is why the Government has a plan to act on climate change, to tackle the long-term needs of the hospital system as well as a plan of action on the future of the Murray-Darling Basin.
We are acting on these challenges.
After a long period of inaction, we have drawn a line in the sand on climate change.
We recognise it as the greatest economic, environmental and moral challenge of our time.
That's why the Government ratified Kyoto on the day we came to power.
It's why we will be implementing a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme to achieve the lowest cost reduction in carbon emissions for Australia.
It's why we are supporting an energy efficiency strategy for the nation.
It's why we will introduce a new national renewable energy strategy for the nation.
And we applaud the leadership being shown by many media organisations and other organisations on reducing carbon emissions and embracing sustainable business practices.
What we do as nations must be matched by what we do as households, what we do as corporations. The planet, at the end, is at stake.
We have begun on a long-term strategy to reform also the health and hospital system and end the blame game between different levels of government.
We have established the National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission and the National Preventative Health Taskforce, and we have invested in our public hospital system and in the reduction of elective surgery waiting lists. This task has just begun.
And through COAG we are negotiating now a new Australian Health Care Agreement, a major step in our long-term program of health reform, to take effect mid-2009.
The Government has also made new forms of community engagement one of our long-term national objectives. The Government that I lead believes that Canberra doesn't always know best, and that we must work hard to always keep in touch with the community.
To do that, we must be open and accountable to the community as well.
That is why the Government has introduced the Lobbyists' Register and Code of Conduct.
That's why in May this year we introduced amendments to the Commonwealth Electoral Act to ban foreign political donations.
It is why we also legislated to reduce the disclosure limit from the $10,000 brought in by the Liberals to $1,000  -  although the Liberals are now obstructing this in the Senate.
Before the election we also made commitments to reform Freedom of Information legislation.
The Government will deliver on those commitments.
As Senator Faulkner announced in July, the Government's FOI reforms will be implemented in two stages.
We will be introducing legislation to abolish conclusive certificates in the current sittings of Parliament.  Conclusive certificates deny people the right to challenge decisions not to release government documents.
As a result of our reforms, Ministers will no longer have an unchallenged power to rule out the release of documents.
Decisions refusing access to a government document will now be subject to full independent review on the merits.
Secondly, we will be releasing an exposure draft of legislation addressing our other FOI commitments.
The draft legislation proposes to establish a Freedom of Information Commissioner, who will be an independent statutory officer. 
Consistent with our commitments, the exposure draft will also address other recommendations made by the Australian Law Reform Commission and Administrative Review Council in their joint report on Open Government.
The exposure draft is expected to be released for public comment in late 2008 or early 2009.
That will give PANPA and other interested parties the opportunity to scrutinise and comment upon the proposed reforms.
Our strong commitment to these reforms does not mean that we won't from time to time have disagreements with some FOI applicants. That is normal.
Robust and effective internal government processes do require confidentiality.
Just as robust and effective internal corporate processes also require confidentiality.
It is a question of balance. We take the strong view that the previous Government got that balance wrong.
And we're determined to get the balance right  -  while recognising that from time to time there will be argy bargy.
The task of developing model whistleblower protection legislation has been given to the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs, which is chaired by Mark Dreyfus QC.
They will be reporting back to the Government by February 2009.
In fact I understand that a number of media representatives are participating in a roundtable that the Committee is holding today.
A further item on our agenda is journalist shield laws.
The Government does not believe that journalists should be prosecuted for publishing material that is merely embarrassing to the government of the day.
The Attorney-General is considering options to strengthen protections for journalists and their sources in reporting the news.  These are real, concrete reforms. They will take a while to do, but we are determined to implement them.
And they will help make government more open, more accountable and more responsive to average Australians. 
Before closing, I would like to return to a core element of the Government's long-term reform agenda  -  the Education Revolution.
For me, a first-class education is both a matter of basic fairness as well as being a national economic imperative.
We have committed as a Government to lifting school retention rates from 75% to 90% by 2020. We are doing this so that nine out of every ten children have the choice of a job, learning a trade or completing a university degree.
We know completing schooling to Year 12 level is important not just as a pathway to further education, but because without it Australians are significantly more likely to be unemployed. 
Each additional year of schooling is associated with around a 10 per cent increase in earnings.
Children who receive a better education are less likely to commit crimes in later life. 
Low educational attainment is also associated with inter-generational poverty and social exclusion.  The individual, social and economic benefits of high quality schooling are inseparable from each other. 
Education is critical to people's life chances, to our future economic growth and to our community life. The Government's revolution must be both quantitative and qualitative.
In our first Budget we allocated $19.3 billion to education initiatives over the next four years.
But we are also implementing a set of qualitative reforms:
     * We have invested $20 million and are developing a national curriculum in English, maths, the sciences and history for all school students by the end of 2010.
     * From 1 January 2009 we will be investing $625 million to encourage more students to study maths and science and pursue related careers including teaching. We need to act on the crisis of maths and science teaching in our schools.
     * We are investing also $62.4 million to re-establish a National Asian Languages and Studies Program so that more students have the opportunity to learn the language and civilisations of our closest neighbours. And again a mission of the Government is this: to make Australia over time into the most Asia-literate country across the collective West.
The most China literate country across the collective west, as this region of ours - the Asia Pacific region - becomes the geo-political, geo-strategic and geo-economic centre of the world in the 21st Century.
Two weeks ago at the National Press Club I set out our quality education agenda for Australian schools.
I announced the three central pillars of reform that the Commonwealth will be seeking to achieve in partnership with State and Territory Governments through COAG:
     * Firstly, improving the quality of teaching;
     * Secondly making school reporting more transparent, and
     * Thirdly lifting achievement in the most disadvantaged schools in our communities
There was a great deal of focus on some specific elements of what I had to say a couple weeks ago, particularly the consequences in individual cases of pursuing these reforms. 
Some reacted strongly to the idea that if we set higher standards, we should insist on them applying in every community.
Our view is, that if despite our best efforts over the long haul, we cannot make a difference to student outcomes, strong action should be expected by parents, teachers, governments and taxpayers to make things right. And I stand today by what I said back then.
But those proposals should not be seen in isolation but as part of an overall agenda to reform and to invest.
As I said when I released my outline of the Education Revolution in January of last year, that is, the month after I became leader of the Parliamentary Labor Party, this revolution requires a substantial and sustained increase in the quantity of our investment, and the quality of our education outcomes.
This is required at every level of education from early childhood to advanced research.
We need to set for ourselves a new national vision  -  for Australia to become the most educated country, the most skilled economy and the best trained workforce in the world.
In our reform agenda and collaboration with the States, we are proposing two distinct pools of reform funding.
To support reforms that advance quality teaching within schools, we will introduce new National Policy Partnerships with the States. These partnerships payments are up-front payments that help drive reform and payments that are made on outcomes achieved.
In the case of disadvantaged schools we have proposed a separate policy partnership with the States to provide more resources to achieve better and measurable outcomes.
Our goal is to see an average sized school in a disadvantaged area receive in the order of an additional $500,000 per year to use flexibly to lift student outcomes.
This might enable a school to employ additional teacher aides, pay high performing teachers who help lift student outcomes to top up on their regular salary - or fund after-school homework or reading classes. 
Over time, reward funding would also be available for the schools that make real progress in these difficult challenges.
We are prepared to support those reforms up front that can make a difference. And we are ready to reward schools that go the extra mile to make sure they continue to improve.
While the priorities and the payments are distinct, their delivery needs to be integrated together so that it has the maximum impact on student learning. 
We will judge each element on the evidence of its effectiveness.  But in reality, none of the reforms we propose - school transparency, teacher quality and lifting attainment in disadvantaged school communities - can be undertaken without the other.
In short, reform is required to identify the weaknesses and then to target additional investment and to measure improvement.
One of the best example of quality schooling lies in Finland. Finland is the highest performing nation in the OECD when it comes to student outcomes.
Finland recruits the top graduates to teaching  -  in fact the top 10 per cent of university graduates become teachers and admission to teaching degrees is tightly controlled.
But they also ensure that every child excels. They employ one specialist education teacher for every seven regular teachers.
This means that children who are at greatest risk of falling behind receive additional one-on-one tuition.
In contrast, in Australia, we find the pool of children failing to meet reading, writing and numeracy benchmarks growing as children move through the primary years  -  3, 5 and 7.
The Preliminary Paper for the 2007 National Report on Schooling in Australia shows that on reading and numeracy, the proportion of our children meeting the benchmarks is declining.
     * Between years 3 and 7 the proportion of students meeting reading benchmarks declines by four percentage points [93.4 to 89.3]
     * Between years 3 and 7 the proportion of students meeting numeracy benchmarks declines by thirteen percentage points [93.2 to 80.2]
The results for children from disadvantaged backgrounds are even more stark.
That is why we need therefore a concrete plan of action.
Like Finland, we want to recruit the best graduates to teach in our schools. That is why we are prepared to offer reform payments to schooling authorities which are prepared to recruit top graduates into teaching, reward our best performing teachers and give them incentives to teach in underperforming schools.
Like Finland we want to ensure that students who need additional support to succeed can get that support.
That is why we are prepared to offer additional assistance to schools which on publicly available data are underperforming compared to similar schools.
This could involve:
     * attracting high performing principals and teachers to underperforming schools;
     * providing funding for intensive learning activities and additional coaching for those students who are falling behind; or
     * providing incentives for individual schools to extend their reach through longer opening hours, after-school study support, sports and other activities to help keep students engaged in their studies.
We want to give school leaders such as the local school principal the tools to confront the challenges they face on the ground. This is a necessary part of an effective national reform program.
In a few weeks' time I will mark the tenth anniversary of my own election to the national Parliament.  In my first speech in Parliament, I called for an education revolution. That was ten years ago.
Within weeks of becoming leader of the Federal leader of the Parliamentary Labor Party, I set out a detailed case for the Education Revolution.
Now, in government, I am determined to implement that Education Revolution.
It will require tough choices, tough decisions, tough reforms.
But without significant change and significant new investment we will not achieve the best we can in the future. Therefore, this Education Revolution is necessary in 21st century economy, necessary to give our kids the best possible start in life, and necessary also for overcoming entrenched disadvantage.
The Education Revolution is central to building a stronger, fairer Australia and one that delivers a better future for all Australians.


Last year I went to the RSL's National Congress in Melbourne as Leader of the Opposition.
And when I spoke, I outlined our commitments for veterans.
Since then we have begun to honour each and every one of those commitments.
And over the weekend the Minister and I announced the fulfilment of another.
We have established a new forum to give veterans a voice in the highest levels of Government.
It is the Prime Ministerial Advisory Council on Ex-service Matters.
Together with the RSL the Council will provide government with continuing advice on the needs of the veterans community.
This proceeds from a deeply held view on the part of the Government that the first responsibility of government is the security of the nation.
And it follows therefore that government has a particular responsibility towards those who have worn the nation's uniform.
Because there is in my view no higher calling than to wear the uniform of Australia.
I am also pleased to announce tonight the appointment of the new Secretary of the Department of Veterans' Affairs.
Mr Ian Campbell the current Australian Electoral Commissioner, will be appointed as Secretary for a five-year term from 22 September 2008.
Mr Campbell brings a lot of experience to the position.
He was deputy president of the Repatriation Commission and a member of the Military Rehabilitation and Compensation Commission between 2000 and 2005.
He has also held Senior Executive Service positions in the employment and health portfolios.
I am sure that Mr Campbell will be working closely with the RSL in the years ahead.
Tonight I would like to speak to you about the long-term defence of Australia.
While I will focus on defence, the Government takes a broad view of what constitutes national security.
We need to respond to our increasingly complex and interconnected security environment, where the lines between traditional notions of external and domestic threats are blurred.
We need a new whole-of-government national security strategy of which our national defence policy is the core component.  
We need a new approach that brings together all the elements of traditional and non-traditional security capabilities that will ensure Australia responds to the full breadth of the threat spectrum that now confront us:
     * Responding to the increased militarisation of our own region;
     * Dealing with the continuing threat of terrorism;
     * Acting on the challenges to sovereignty facing the Pacific Island countries;
     * Preparing for the new challenges of energy security; and
     * Anticipating the impact of climate change on long-term food and water security.
As veterans you understand the breadth of the challenges we face in the defence of this nation.
During this session of Parliament we will have Australia's first ever National Security Statement.
That Statement will set out the way we will approach the full range of our national security challenges  -  from defence to domestic security.
It will outline the institutional framework within which the Government will determine our national security policy settings for the future.
Defence, of course, remains the single most critical component of national security.
And getting long-term defence policy settings right will be done through the Defence White Paper due later this year.
The White Paper will set out in detail the strategic terrain we face.
It will also set out the type of defence capabilities Australia will need.
It will also dictate the type of force structure we will need  -  a structure which will in part need to last us until the middle decades of the century.
The 21st century looms as the century of the Asia Pacific.
By 2030, and possibly even by 2020, the Asia-Pacific region will be home to the largest and most dynamic economies in the world.
And these economies will all be closely tied to each other through trade and investment.
This economic power means that the Asia-Pacific region will also be the source of much, if not most of the world's income, investment, ideas, innovation and technology.
This will bring enormous economic opportunities for Australia.
It will also bring some strategic risks.
And the task of an effective national security policy is to maximise the opportunities and minimise the risks.
Driving much of the change in our region will be the rise of China.
China will be the most dynamic major economy in the first half of this century - followed by India.
According to some estimates, by 2020 China will replace the United States as the world's largest economy.
China's economic growth will change the way it sees its own role in the world.
And it will change the way others see China  -  the Olympics are a great example of that.
Over the long term it is clear that China will have more political influence in our region.
Our other major Asian trading partner, Japan, will remain a major world economy even if it is not recording the growth rates of China.
An ageing population will have a major impact on Japan by 2050, with more than one-third of its population over 65.
But given its stature in the region and its continuing strength, Japan remains a major global and regional power.
The United States is likely to remain the world's only superpower through to the mid-century.
Over the coming decades, the United States may see its position decline relative to other economies, but it will remain a major economic influence and a powerful source of ideas, innovation and technology in the global economy.
You only have to look at the US's unmatched capacity for transforming new ideas into new technology.
The United States accounts for around one-third of all world patents.
By contrast, Australia accounted for 1.6 per cent and China 1.8 per cent in 2004.
The United States has shown time and time again that it can rise to any challenge and constantly evolve.
So nobody should ever underestimate the ability of the US to maintain its global leadership role.
The United States will also remain strategically dominant given the vast array of military capabilities available to future US administrations.
The Asia-Pacific region will become more prosperous and its population will continue to grow.
Militarily, however, as it has already become economically and politically, the Asia-Pacific will become a much more contested region.
The region's total population will exceed four billion by 2020, or 56 per cent of the world's total. 
Australia's population will only experience modest growth, growing to around 35 million by 2050.
But China's population is expected to peak at around 1.5 billion in 2030.
India will near the 1.8 billion mark by mid-century.
Indonesia's population could be as high as 350 million.
The demographic changes in our region will mean that by 2020 when we look to our north, we will see a very different region to the one we see now  -  one where population, food, water and energy resource pressures will be great.
We have to add one more element to this mix when we are looking at the future, and that is the existing military and political fault lines.
We still have North and South Korea technically at war.
We have mainland China and Taiwan still unable to resolve basic questions of sovereignty  -  although recent developments might give rise to some optimism.
We have unresolved border disputes between many countries including between China and India and between China and its maritime neighbours in the South China Sea  -  but it is reassuring to note that these disputes have been managed to this point.
In short, we have a rapidly changing region, but one still characterised by a number of unresolved flash points arising from unsettled territorial disputes.
As nations grow and become more affluent, they also update their military forces.
We see this in our own region.
We see a substantial arms build-up over time.  
We need to be aware of the changes taking place. And we must make sure that we have the right mix of capabilities to deal with any contingencies that might arise in the future.
The growth in Asian and US military expenditures has dominated recent increases in global military spending.
And, as a general observation, the modernisation of Asian military forces is being characterised by significant improvements in air combat capability, and naval forces  -  including greater numbers and more advanced submarines.
We are also witnessing a  gradually increasing ability to use military assets more powerfully through more advanced communications, joint command and intelligence systems.
As we look at our own Australian defence needs for the decades ahead, we need to ensure we are at the forefront of military technology development and acquisition.
Our armed forces must be equipped to deal with the emerging security environment.
For that, we need to further develop key capabilities.
We need a first rate and flexible land force  -  one capable of taking on challenges from contributing to high-end military engagements through to delivering post-conflict reconstruction support.
We need an enhanced naval capability that can protect our sea lanes of communication and support our land forces as they deploy.
And we need an air force that can fill support and combat roles and can deter, defeat and provide assistance to land and maritime forces.
It is not easy to tailor a force to meet every possible contingency, so we need to choose our equipment and our people carefully.
Of course, technology itself does not win wars or ensure a nation's defence.
To make the most out of technology you need the best trained, best commanded forces possible.
Properly trained professional soldiers with the ability to think tactically and strategically are the decisive factor.
And on this score, Australia has been richly blessed as evidenced by our soldier's performance in the field.
But all of this will come at a price.
That is why the Government has already committed to making sure we stay ahead of the game by extending the real growth of the defence budget by 3 per cent per annum to 2017-18.
That is why defence has been quarantined from the Government's efficiency dividend in the last budget.
That is why we will continue to do so in to the future  -  so that any savings realised in the defence portfolio are re-invested back in to the future of the ADF.
We also have to realise that our national security relies on more than a strong defence force.
It relies also on careful management of the foreign relations we have with countries around us with our allies and friends around the world.
The Government's strategic policy involves three components  -  what we call the three pillars of our international policy:
     * a firm commitment to our alliance with the United States;
     * comprehensive engagement with Asia and the Pacific; and
     * comprehensive engagement with the United Nations and the multilateral order.
Our alliance with the United States is and will remain the bedrock of our strategic policy.
It is an alliance with a long history.
And the military cooperation between our two nations goes back even further  -  to the First World War.
This year is the 90th anniversary of the Battle of Hamel when Australian and US troops first fought side-by-side under the command of Sir John Monash.
Under this Government the alliance will be strengthened through greater and closer operational cooperation.
Under this Government, security policy cooperation will also be strengthened with a number of regional partners including Japan, Republic of Korea, Indonesia, Maylaysia and Singapore. 
When I visited Japan in June, the Prime Minister and I agreed to deepen our security cooperation even further.
When I visited Korea at the start of August I agreed with President Lee Myung-bak that Australia and Korea would begin to look at how we could move in the same direction.
We already have a strong history of military cooperation with South Korea  -  I think we need to use that base to build our cooperation for the decades ahead.
Across South East Asia I am also determined to strengthen our security cooperation.
The strength of our ties with Malaysia and Singapore must be maintained and developed.
The Five Powers Defence Arrangement has been an important part of our defence engagement since 1971.
And it remains the only multilateral defence treaty in our region with an operational element, which helps in our shared fight against terrorism.
With Indonesia I was pleased that President Yudhoyono and I agreed in June to strengthen our cooperation under the Lombok Treaty.
The Lombok Treaty provides a framework for increased security cooperation to combat terrorism, and transnational crime and other security threats.
It provides a framework for cooperation between our defence and domestic law enforcement agencies.
We are committed to developing fully this security relationship.
The Government also wishes to expand its security policy cooperation with India.
Together with our security policy dialogue with China.
Our security and political relationships with our smaller neighbours are also critical.
This Government has deliberately sought to put our relations with the Pacific island nations on a new footing.
We recognise that Australia and the Pacific Island nations share a common goal of stability and prosperity in our region and that the best way to achieve that is through closer cooperation  -  including in defence and security.
As the Asia-Pacific region changes, we will need to think about how we want the region to look in 2020.
We need to think about how we can ensure that our region is stable and prosperous in the decades ahead.
To that end, we have started a regional conversation about how to shape the future of our region, rather than simply let it be shaped by events.
We have started the discussion about how we can develop an Asia Pacific Community.
If we do not start to think now about where we want the region to go, we run the risk of competition and tension overriding cooperation.
Australia is well placed to begin this process of discussion.
As a middle power, we can propose ideas that other larger powers might have trouble taking the lead on.
Another example of this is the International Commission on Nuclear Non-proliferation and Disarmament.
The danger posed by nuclear weapons has not disappeared.
In fact, some argue that the threat is as great as it has ever been because more states now have nuclear weapons and the threat of the technology spreading, including perhaps to terrorist groups, has grown.
So we need to galvanise the international community behind efforts to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons and work towards the goal of their eventual elimination.
I have appointed Gareth Evans to co-chair the Commission with former Japanese Foreign Minister Ms Yoriko Kawaguchi.
Their  task is to lead a group of experts to come up with some new thinking  -  based on hard-headed strategic analysis  -  about how we deal with nuclear weapons.
And about how we re-energise the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.
Australia has the credibility and the drive to lead initiatives like this  -  in part because they are in our interest, but also because they make a positive contribution to the international community.
As a middle power, Australia has much to gain from strong global institutions, particularly the United Nations.
That is why we are seeking a non-permanent seat on the UN Security Council in 2013-14.
Creative middle power diplomacy is once again hard at work in enhancing our enhancing our security policy cooperation across East Asia; in strengthening our alliance with the United States; in reaching the regional and multilateral nuclear non-proliferation agenda; and in building the region's long-term cooperative architecture.
But diplomacy must always be reinforced by a credible national defence strategy .
The changes in our region are, in reality, the major changes facing the world.
I see two main strands to our response to the changing strategic terrain.
First, we have a diplomatic strategy that is aimed at keeping our region peaceful and prosperous.
Second, we need to make sure that we have an Australian Defence Force that can answer the call if it is needed.
The calls we make will be diverse  -  from responding to natural disasters to conducting offensive combat operations  -  and our forces need to be able to respond to a range of contingencies.
And the truth is our defence has been overstretched for a long time.
The tempo of current operations has too often taken precedence over proper planning for personnel and equipment for the future.
Getting this right will require much work.
And that is what we are doing through the White Paper process.
The Government looks forward to a long-term constructive relationship with the RSL as we build Australia's defence force to meet the demands of the 21st century.


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history. 
We gather to pay tribute to Edward Gough Whitlam.
12th Leader of the Australian Labor Party.
21st Prime Minister of this Australian Commonwealth.
Great reformer of this great Australian nation.
To pay tribute in simple terms is to say thank you.
And there are many who would say thank you.
Those young Australians, often the first in their families, given their first opportunity to go to university.
Those Aboriginal Australians whose land rights were finally and formally recognised under the laws of the Commonwealth.
Those migrant families who joined a warm, welcoming and genuinely multicultural Australia which for the first time celebrated diversity rather than demanding uniformity.
The women of Australia who were guaranteed, for the first time under law, genuine equality in the workplace.
The workers in industries who rose to the challenge of a world where tariff protection had become unsustainable and where the Whitlam Government had the courage to recognise that to survive we had to compete in the world, rather than protect ourselves from it.
The sick and the infirm who, for the first time, were afforded universal health insurance where treatment was prioritised according to physical need rather than the ability to pay.
The authors, the artists and the filmmakers who gained their start on a Whitlam fellowship and who gave expression to a new independent, and creative Australian identity.
This is an extraordinary legacy of an extraordinary man.
It is the legacy of a man who realised there was no time to be lost.
A man who realised that opportunities were to be seized  -  rather than allow opportunities to be squandered.
These qualities go to the temperament of his leadership.
But they also point to the content of his policy.
To the utter dismay of his political opponents, so much of his reform program has survived - despite the succession of conservative administrations that followed him.
Each trying to tear him down.
Each failing miserably in their most miserable of tasks.
The question to be asked is why has so much of the Whitlam legacy endured not just the ravages of time  -  but also the systematic assault of the conservative political establishment?
The answer, I believe, is that in his mind's eye, Gough Whitlam could see a future for Australia vastly different from so much of its suffocating past.
The answer, I believe, also lies in the fact that in the great tradition of progressive politics, Whitlam sought to shape that future, rather than simply respond to events.
And that in shaping that future, he brought to bear the great, the good, the continuing values of our movement and of our nation  -  that we could craft an Australia that was strong, secure and competitive while not extinguishing the fires of the Australian soul.
A soul that by instinct, by inclination and hewn by historical experience, was animated by the possibility that this nation should also be a place of cooperation, of compassion, of creativity  -  and above all, a fair go for all.
Labor's mission has been to embrace both these traditions  -  what others have called a nation of ‘hard heads and soft hearts'.
The conservatives' mission has been to deny that any such reconciliation is possible.
We have the audacity to believe that it is.
Politically theirs has always been the easier task  -  to argue that, in the end, the only practical proposition is economic self interest.
Ours has been a more complex task  -  as we argue that self interest, in the absence of a parallel concern for the interests of others, is incomplete.
That the interest of the individual and of the commons are inseparable.
That rather than contradicting each other, in fact they temper each other and reinforce each other.
Furthermore, we are so bold as to hold this truth to be self-evident. 
Nowhere is this truth more self-evident today than in the great debate of our age  -  the short term self-interests of some against the long term sustainabiliy of our planet that ultimately sustains us all.
So whether it is the role of government against the market;
The role of the economy against the needs of the physical environment that sustains the economy;
Or the role of national self-interest against the need for international cooperation to deal with the common challenges of humanity;
The principle is a continuing principle  -  and constitutes the core dividing line between progressive politics and conservative politics; between social democrats and neo-liberals, and, in Australia, between Labor and the Coalition.
That self-interest and the interests of our fellow human beings are inseparable.
Labor therefore sees itself in the tradition of the reforming centre of Australian politics.
Recognising the power of markets and the limitations of markets where markets fail.
Recognising the abiding importance of public goods including education, the environment and security for all.
Recognising the power of targeted government intervention  -  while also recognising the limitations of government in the form of all-providing state that only serves to suffocate the enterprise of individuals.
We have seen this tradition of the reforming centre alive in Whitlam, alive in Hawke, alive in Keating  -  and equally alive in the policy direction of this new Australian Labor Government of today.
Gough Whitlam's visionary government was one of those turning points - in contemporary jargon, ‘tipping points' - in our party's and our nation's history.
The Australian Labor Party was founded in 1891.
Gough Whitlam was born only a quarter of a century later in 1916 -and therefore has lived a life that has spanned most of the history of our party, itself one of the oldest continuing political parties in the world.
1916 was the year that Andrew Fisher resigned as Prime Minister after leading the world's first majority Labor Government - Fisher's government having helped deliver great reforms including the arbitration system, the aged pension and the Commonwealth Bank together with great national institutions such as the Royal Australian Navy.
A quarter of a century later, when John Curtin was Prime Minister, Gough Whitlam served his nation in uniform.
When Curtin died, in 1945, Whitlam joined the Australian Labor Party.
When Chifley died in 1951, Whitlam put himself forward for preselection for Werriwa which he won and held for the following quarter of a century.
He spent 20 years in Parliament before he came to government.
They were 20 years of deep disappointment.
Disappointment but never despair.
He did not buckle.
He did not waver.
He did not just keep the faith.
He fought the fight.
Beginning with the fight to reform what had become a moribund party  -  the first of three great Whitlam reforms which I believe symbolizes so much of his leadership.
When Gough became leader, the party had been out of office for nearly 20 years.
The parliamentary party had balkanised.
The party organisation had atrophied.
The party policy platform had ossified.
Gough Whitlam turned all that on its head.
Against the faceless men, it was crash through or crash.
And Whitlam crashed through.
His core message was that the Labor Party was open to all people of good will who supported the progressive political project  -  not just a narrow protected industrial group.
Whitlam's tradition of party reform continues to speak to us today.
The windows of the party must continue to be held wide open to all comers: from business, from the unions, from the professions, from the trades, from rural Australia, from immigrant Australia, from all corners of Australian life.
Ours must be a genuinely broad church, representing the face of contemporary Australia, united by Labor's continuing values and the urgent demand of translating these values to the challenges of the future - without being hide-bound by archaic formulas from the past.
One of those challenges of the future is our engagement with our neighbours in Asia  -  and here, once again, Whitlam was a reformer ahead of his time.
Once again, he could see in his mind's eye a different future for Australia.
While the conservatives remained blinded by the Cold War, Whitlam saw the beginning of a new strategic and economic relationship between China and the West arising from the Sino-Soviet split.
The conservatives railed against him for embracing China.
The very same conservatives were rendered mute when Kissinger and Nixon did the same.
Whitlam looking to the future.
The conservatives, once again, lost in the past.
Whitlam looked to the future on how to engage China 35 years before it rose to become the world's second largest economy and prospectively the largest. (Remember in Gough's day, China's economy was smaller than that of Australia).
On China and the wider region, Whitlam began the work which his sucessors have continued.
How to engage China on the economy.
How to engage China on climate change.
And how to engage China, Japan, and the United States in a manner which preserves the peace of the Pacific Century  -  rather than allowing the century to drift in the direction of conflict.
These are the challenges of which the new Australian Government is deeply seized  -  driven also by our vision to make Australia the most China-literate and Asia-literate country in the collective West.
But in this setting at Sydney University, we should pay particular tribute to the Whitlam Government for a third great reform which has given so many women and men the opportunity to go to university.
Previously, the cloisters of great universities like this had been reserved as finishing schools for the privileged.
But Gough Whitlam, himself a graduate of our oldest university, flung open its gates to all. Because he believed that access to an education of the highest quality should be determined on one factor alone: merit.
Whitlam recognised that restricting education to the wealthy only entrenches  existing privilege, and prevents our finest minds from reaching their fullest potential.
Whitlam recognised that our nation's economic prosperity is directly linked to the prosperity of our minds.
But the revolution achieved by the Whitlam Government was not limited to the university sector.
It also extended to our schools. For decades, Labor had refused, for ideological reasons, to fund Catholic and independent schools.
But Whitlam changed all that.
Instead he treated government and non-government schools alike and allocated funding according to one simple principle: need.
‘Merit' and ‘need'. Put those propositions together and you begin to build a reform agenda for the future.
But there's one particular Australian who owes a debt of gratitude to Gough Whitlam for the way he transformed Australia.
A high school kid from the Queensland country.
A kid inspired by Gough and Margaret's audacious and historic journeys to China. 
A kid for whom that visit sparked a lifelong interest in Australia's national destiny with its neighbours and with the world.
A kid who lived Gough Whitlam's dream that every child should have a desk with a lamp on it where he or she could study.
A kid whose mum told him after the '72 election that it might just now be possible for the likes of him to go to university.
A kid from the country of no particular means and of no political pedigree who could therefore dream that one day he could make a contribution to our national political life.
That kid was me.
And more than 30 years after the Whitlam revolution, I am proud to stand before you as Prime Minister.
And I owe it to the fact that I am the beneficiary of a Whitlam education.
Some ask why I believe in an education revolution.
The answer is simple: I and many others are the beneficiaries of one.
Education is the engine room of equity.
Education is the engine room of the economy.
Therefore to invest in education is to invest in our future  -  as individuals and as a nation.
The galvanising vision of the government is to become the best educated, best trained, best skilled workforce in the world.
This must be our ambition for the nation.
It must be our ambition for ourselves.
There is no alternative for the 21st Century when knowledge-intensive industries will determine the wealth of nations.
It is not in my view a coincidence that, two centuries ago the author of the original “Wealth of Nations”, Adam Smith, deemed education should always be a public good.
To achieve an education revolution requires a revolution in how much we invest as well as how we invest it.
It requires a revolution in our quantitative investments.
And in our qualitative investment.
An emphasis on the resources we put in to education as well as an emphasis on what comes out in the form of educational outcomes for our young people.
From early childhood education.
Through schools.
Through vocational education and training.
Through universities.
Through research.
Through innovation.
Through investing in the knowledge-based industries of the future.
As a government of the reforming centre, Labor's reform agenda is a broad one.
To build a more secure Australia by widening the compass of our national security engagement, by enhancing our national defence, and by expanding our diplomacy abroad in the great Labor tradition of creative middle-power diplomacy.
To build a stronger Australia through a policy of responsible economic management, a long term program of economic reform to lift our productivity growth, and an ambitious plan of 21st Century nation-building.
To build a fairer Australia through a fair and flexible industrial relations system; tax reform for low and middle income Australians; the reform of income support payments; tackling housing affordability and homelessness and acting on closing the gap between indigenous and non-indigenous Australians.
To build an Australia capable of responding to the challenges of the future including climate change, the Murray-Darling, the ageing of the population, the challenges facing our health and hospital system and the reform of the federation.
And through all of this, to explore a new way of governing so that government continues to engage the Australian community on local community needs between elections  -  and not just at election time.
The reform agenda is as wide as it is deep - as it is urgent.
A reform agenda that is now doubly necessary given the squandered opportunities of the decade past.
Reviews of the Whitlam legacy have tended to be of two types: hagiography or demonization.
Gough, like the rest of us, is mortal.
And all mortals are capable of human failure.
And the Whitlam Government had its failures.
But the successes obtained in three short years of the Whitlam government have endured now for a generation and more.
And that is because as a movement we have sought to write the nation's history  -  while our opponents have sought to re-write it rather than write their own.
As a movement we have sought to use our political incumbency to plan for the nation's future  -  rather than use incumbency (as our opponents have) for the sake of incumbency itself.
As a movement we have sought to be nation builders  -  rather than our opponents who have never believed in nation building.
But beyond all these things, we as a movement have always sought to build up the nation's hopes rather than play to the nation's fears  -  as our opponent routinely have done.
As others have said, to play to the good angels in our human nature, rather than the bad.
To build up rather than to tear down.
To Include rather than exclude.
To unite rather than divide.
This has been the mission of Labor.
To craft a secure Australia, a strong Australia, a competitive Australia  -  but also an Australia where the fair go is not just an idle sentiment from the ballads and Paterson and Lawson in our past, but an enlivening and integral part of our future as well.
It is to this great cause that this remarkable Australian has dedicated his life.
And it is for this that a grateful party and a grateful the nation pays tribute to him.


Violence against women is difficult to talk about.
But for those who find it difficult, let us be clear  -  however uncomfortable it is to talk about, it is degrading and damaging to experience.
We often prefer silence to the confronting truth that nearly half a million Australian women have experienced violence from their partner or former partner.
Well, we can be silent no longer.
Because for too long, silence has been seen as tolerance.
This is just plain wrong.
And the time has well and truly come to turn this around.
As a nation, the time has well and truly come to have a national conversation  -  a public national conversation, not a private one  -  about how it could still be the case that in 2008 half a million Australian women could have experienced violence from their partner. 
And the objective is to turn this terrible statistic around.
Because each of these statistics is a human face.
And it is my gender  -  it is our gender  -  Australian men  -  
that are responsible. 
And so the question is: what are we going to do about it?
Analysis of Bureau of Statistics figures indicates that[1]:
     * In any year, nearly half a million Australian women experience physical or sexual assault by a current or former partner.[2]
     * One in three Australian women have experienced physical violence.
     * One in five Australian women have experienced sexual violence.[3]
     * Less than one third of all physical and sexual violence is reported to police.
     * Approximately 90 per cent of women who experience sexual assault do not access crisis support, legal help or other support services such as telephone helplines.
Violence against women is the great silent crime of our time.
It is the silence that makes it the most insidious.
Because it prefers the darkness. 
Because if it stays in the darkness, it cannot be discussed, debated  -  let alone dealt with.
To begin with, we need to change the attitudes of Australian men.
From birth, it must be drilled into the conscious and the subconscious of all men that there are no circumstances  -  no circumstances  -  in which violence against women is acceptable.
There are no circumstances in which the threat of violence against women is acceptable. 
There are no circumstances in which the thought of violence against women is acceptable.
That on violence against women, we have simple, clear policy in two words: zero tolerance.
That needs to be heard from every husband, every father, every partner.
From every celebrity. 
From every business leader.
From every football player.
From every brick layer.
From every bus driver.
From every factory worker.
From every office worker.
From every lecturer.
From every teacher.
From every student.
And from every politician of every political persuasion.
And it needs to be heard in every place.
In our parliaments.
In our work places.
At our barbeques.
Violence against women needs to move from the great silence to be part of a continuing national conversation. 
Why?
Because we need to change the way many men think.
We need to change the way some boys think.
And that cannot be done in silence.
Before coming to office, we said we would implement a national strategy against violence and sexual assault.
That strategy includes three things:
     * supporting women who have been the victims of violence;
     * ensuring that the legal system is effective in handling cases of violence against women; and
     * ending the cycle of violence for future generations.
To develop this strategy, the Government has brought together a group of experts and community leaders - the National Council to Reduce Violence Against Women, chaired by Libby Lloyd, one of the driving forces behind the Australian White Ribbon Foundation.
I was pleased to be able to join the Council in June this year at its first meeting.
And I'm pleased to see so many Council members here tonight.
I'm looking forward to seeing and supporting the National Plan that the Council will be presenting to Tanya Plibersek, the Minister for the Status of Women.
I understand that the Council has now received 370 submissions from organisations and individuals contributing ideas to be included in the Plan.
Once finalised, the plan will allow the Government to pursue the most effective, evidence-based approach that can help prevent violence and assist women who are still its victims. 
The truth is, we can't reduce violence against women unless we change the attitudes of future generations.
On their own, all the laws in the world can't stop violence against women unless there is a genuine change in the way that Australian men think.
If we are going to be effective in changing community attitudes we need a better understanding of those attitudes now, and how those attitudes change over time. 
We need to understand how those views are formed, so that we can target our efforts towards the most effective measures that cultivate respect for women.
We know that men who tolerate violence towards women are more likely to perpetrate violence than those who do not.[4] 
For example, some believe that violence can be excused in certain circumstances; that women sometimes "ask for it" or "deserve" violence; or, that violence is a trivial matter.
According to a Victorian study,[5] almost one in four people believe domestic violence can be excused if the perpetrator genuinely regrets what they have done afterward, or if the violence results from a temporary loss of control.
It's those attitudes that lie behind the continuing high incidence of violence against women.
We need to get to the bottom of those attitudes, and find the best way of changing them.
That's why I am announcing tonight that the Australian Government will invest up to $2 million in research and analysis of Australian community attitudes towards violence against women.
This project will be carried out in partnership with VicHealth, the Social Research Centre[6] and the Australian Institute of Criminology.
This research will help us to track changing community attitudes over time to give us the best evidence base for changing the attitudes of men.
This will help shape the practical recommendations of our National Plan for the future. 
To change attitudes, young men need to grow up with positive role models in their communities.
During the election, the Government committed to a comprehensive high school education program to help young men and young women to develop respectful relationships.
I am pleased to announce tonight that at the start of next year, we will be testing several programs to measure their effectiveness in both schools and youth organisations.
One model that the Government is testing is the Victorian Centre Against Sexual Assault's Sexual Assault Prevention Program for Secondary Schools.
This is a program that engages the whole school community and helps all students and teachers to take responsibility for their part in preventing violence against women.
There are a number of very promising educative models operating across Australia that are building positive values and ethical relationships amongst young people.
These programs are a valuable contribution to the development of our National Plan.
The White Ribbon Foundation is also doing great work in providing positive community role models to challenge and change the attitudes of men and boys.
The Government has provided $1 million to extend the reach of White Ribbon Day educational activities into rural and regional communities, particularly in high schools.
One of the unique features of White Ribbon is how it has brought together such a diverse range of male leaders, from judges to football players to academics, media personalities, police and politicians.
Tonight's White Ribbon Ambassador Award is a way of recognising the excellent work of those ambassadors.
There are many people here tonight whom I know have made extraordinary contributions to the White Ribbon campaign.
But there can be only one winner, and he is a very deserving one.
I am pleased tonight to announce that the 2008 Winner of the White Ribbon Ambassador Award is Mark Burgess, CEO Police Federation of Australia.
Mark has been a White Ribbon Ambassador since 2004.
His long career in the NSW Police gave him a deep understanding of the brutal reality of violence.
But it is in his role leading the Police Federation of Australia since 2000 that Mark has provided such strong leadership to promote awareness and understanding of violence against women.
Mark's efforts are making a real difference among the 52,000 police officers who are on the front line in dealing with violence.
Mark has given enormously of his time and energies to this campaign, and he's always willing to help out more.
So I am delighted to be able to present Mark with tonight's Award and to support the excellent efforts of White Ribbon in making a difference to the lives of hundreds of thousands of Australian women.
The White Ribbon Foundation is an outstanding initiative  -  men and women coming together and saying that we cannot tolerate violence any more. 
That we will not tolerate violence any more.
That the time has come as a culture, as a country and as a nation to draw a line in the sand, once and for all.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Footnotes
[1] ABS, Personal Safety Survey 4906.0 2005
[2] Exact figure is 443,300 (or 6 per cent of the female population)
[3] Some women will experience both domestic violence and sexual assault
[4] Flood and Pease (2006). The factors influencing community attitudes in relation to violence against women: a critical review of the literature  -  Paper Three of the Violence Against Women Community Attitudes Project, VicHealth, Melbourne.
[5] Victorian Department of Health (2006). Two steps forward, one step back  -  Community attitudes to violence against women: Progress and challenges in creating safe and healthy environments for Victorian women.
[6] The Social Research Centre is a Victorian based research company that specialises in social and health policies.


I move:
That this bill be now read a second time.
Earlier this year we opened up the doors of Parliament to the people of Australia for the Australia 2020 Summit.
We did so looking for new ideas for our nation's long term future.
Ideas for tackling the nation's future challenges.
Many constructive ideas came forward, and later this year the government will be responding to each of them.
One of the key ideas discussed for the future of Australia's health and hospitals system was to establish a national organ donation scheme.
And that is why today I introduce, with some pride, to the House the Australian Organ and Tissue Donation and Transplantation Authority Bill 2008.
This is to provide the national leadership that Australia needs to lift organ donation rates and make it possible for our expert transplant doctors and health professionals to save many more lives, and return many Australians to good health.
For too long, organ donation rates in Australia have lagged behind many other nations, despite high levels of community support for organ donation.
For too long, Australians have been left desperately waiting, month after month, for a transplant that could mean the difference between a normal, healthy life and debilitating chronic illness.
And in some cases, the difference between life and death.
For too long, people have talked about the need to lift organ donation rates but there has been no national leadership to take action on that goal.
And for too long, we have failed to act despite projections of a rising prevalence of chronic disease, an ageing population and, as a result, increased needs for organ transplants.
Last year, we made it clear that this government intends to end the blame game between the Commonwealth and the states and take responsibility for reforming our health and hospitals system.
That the government I would lead would get on with getting things right.
Today, the government delivers on that commitment.
Today, I stand before the House to move a bill that forms a central part of a national plan to reduce unnecessary suffering for thousands of Australians who are waiting for transplants.
Today, I move a bill that will help to honour our commitment to establishing Australia as a world leader for organ donation and transplantation.
As Australians we are fortunate to live in a nation that has long been a world leader in the clinical outcomes we achieve for transplant patients - a nation where more than 90 per cent of people support organ donation. Yet we are also a nation with a very long, far too long, waiting list for transplant procedures.
At any one time there are 1,800 Australians currently on waiting lists for an organ donation that could save or transform their life. 
Last year, there were just 198 deceased organ donors in Australia.
This resulted in 657 transplants - meeting just one-third of demand.
We should not tolerate so many Australians languishing on waiting lists for want of national leadership to lift organ donor rates.
Despite the high quality of clinical care across our nation, we lag well behind many other developed countries in organ donations.
The International Registry of Organ Donation and Transplantation reports that, in Australia, there were just 9.8 donors for every one million people in 2006.
In contrast:
     * Spain had 33.8 donors for every one million persons - more than three times higher than Australia.
     * The United States had 26.9 donors for every million persons - more than 2½ times the rate in Australia.
While Spain and the United States are world leaders respectively, Australia's ranking for organ donors per million population was behind Belgium, Austria, France, Italy, Ireland, Hungary, Czech republic, Norway, Germany, Sweden, Canada, Poland, the Netherlands, Argentina, Denmark, Switzerland and the UK.
We need to do much, much better.
This is simply not good enough - not for today, and especially not for the future.
In the decades ahead of us we will have an older population, and a population with a much higher incidence of chronic diseases such as obesity and type 2 diabetes.
Several of those chronic diseases can result in the need for a transplant.
Consider kidney disease.
More than three-quarters of people waiting for an organ transplant are in need of a kidney. 
Even now, one in three Australian adults face an elevated risk of developing chronic kidney disease. 
And the incidence of kidney disease is almost certain to rise further, because of its link to other chronic diseases.
Australia also has a high prevalence of hepatitis C infection.
Hepatitis C infection causes increased rates of chronic liver disease, resulting in a greater need for liver transplants.  
There are many other donor organs that are likely to be in greater need in the years ahead.
The long waiting list for transplants also imposes significant costs on our health and hospitals system.
For example, the cost for each person waiting on a kidney transplant is $83,000 per annum if they are receiving hospital based kidney dialysis.
In contrast, the cost of a kidney transplant is just $65,000 per recipient for the first year, and only $11,000 for each year thereafter.
Australians awaiting a transplant require extensive, expensive and time-consuming treatment.
That can make it harder for them to carry on work, to play an active role in their community and to enjoy a reasonable quality of life, all of which are important.
Lifting organ donor rates will help us build a more efficient health system and help sick Australians back to full participation in work and in the community.
But above all the reason why we must lift the number of organ donations is that, by doing this, we can help save and transform the lives of thousands of Australians of all ages.
Let me mention just one example.
A fortnight ago I informed the House that I had privilege of meeting with Cordelia Whatman, her parents, big sister Octavia and grandparents.
Cordelia had just returned home to her family and to Canberra after four months in hospital.
For those of you who are not familiar with Cordelia's story, she was diagnosed with biliary artesia at 10 weeks.
Biliary artesia is a chronic liver problem that affects vital body functions.
Having undertaken an unsuccessful procedure in July 2007, Cordelia had been suffering from severe jaundice, a broken leg, lethargy, debilitation and inability to gain weight.
But just a few weeks ago, that all changed.
And it all changed for one reason - a donor organ became available to her.
The transplant operation was performed at the Children's Hospital at Westmead in Sydney. Cordelia had a 13-doctor medical team, headed by Dr Albert Shun and Dr Michael Stormon. Each member of that team is to be congratulated.
Shortly after, Cordelia was discharged from hospital, the transplant operation a success.
Cordelia had to wait more than a year on a transplant waiting list.
During that long wait, Cordelia was becoming increasingly sick.
Indeed, the doctors had declared an operation urgent, and Cordelia's mother was only days from providing a liver donation herself.
That operation could have placed her mother's life at risk.
But it was made unnecessary when a donor organ finally became available.
Today, Cordelia can look forward to a healthy life - because of the selfless act of a donor and their family. And we thank them.
Cordelia's donor also provided six other organs, potentially saving the lives of others with their decision.
In Australia today there are some 30,000 people who like Cordelia have benefited from an organ or tissue transplantation in this country.
We have some of these people with us here today, as well as some who are among the 1,800 now waiting for a transplant.
I would like particularly to acknowledge some of them who are with us today in the gallery:
Felix Bulmer, aged 17, who benefited from a corneal graft that has dramatically improved his vision; Russell McGowan, who has had a bone marrow transplant; Marjorie Taylor, the mother of Annette Taylor, who expressed her wish to become an organ donor before her death at the age of just 13. Marjorie took it to then Prime Minister Whitlam to ensure that her daughter could go through with her wish - and so she became the first organ donor in the ACT.  That was more than 30 years ago.
These are just three of the 30,000 Australians who can tell a story of how an organ transplant can transform your life.
Transplantation make it possible for people of all ages to enjoy those things that we too often take for granted - the ability to live free of debilitating disease, the ability to live a fit and active life, the ability to continue as a healthy member of their family and community.
The government is determined to make transplants possible for many more Australians.
And that is why - and that is the only reason why - this bill is before the House today.
When we look the nations that have enjoyed most success with organ donor rates, we learn one clear lesson.
National leadership is needed to drive the change necessary to improve rates of organ donation.
The nations that lead the world in organ donation and transplantation rates all have national systems to coordinate and drive this program actively within each individual hospital.
These national frameworks are supported by ongoing community and professional education.
The bill that comes before the House today reflects international best practice.
It forms a core part of the reform package that the government announced on 2 July this year, to lift Australia to world's best practice in organ and tissue donation for transplantation.
The government has committed $151.1 million towards this objective, including $136.4 million in new funds. This is not cheap. To do it well takes money, and we are determined to invest this money.
And this package was endorsed by the Council of Australian Governments when it met on 3 July.
The national plan consists of five key steps:
     * $46 million to introduce a coordinated, consistent approach and systems under the leadership of a new, independent national authority - the Australian Organ Donation and Transplantation Authority - that is established under the bill that is before the House today.
     * $67 million to employ trained medical specialists and other staff dedicated to organ donation who will work closely with emergency department and intensive care unit teams in selected public and private hospitals across Australia.
     * $17 million in new funding for hospitals to meet additional staffing, bed and infrastructure costs associated with organ donation.
     * $13.4 million towards raising community awareness and building public confidence in Australia's donation for a transplantation system.
     * $1.9 million for counsellors to support donor families.
This is a comprehensive plan, based on international best practice, that aims in the long term to establish Australia as a world leader in organ donation for transplantation.
It will mean that:
     * potential donors are properly identified at hospitals across the country;
     * every family of a potential donor will be asked about organ donation;
     * a dedicated specialist will work with the potential donor and their family to provide support through what is often a very, very difficult process;
     * hospital staff will be able to focus on donor care knowing that the hospital has a separate budget to cover organ and tissue donation;
     * families receive the support they need at the time of organ donation and afterwards; and
     * there is an equitable and safe process for managing transplant waiting lists and allocating organs once they become available.
One of the most important parts of this plan is to tackle the point at which our organ donor system is currently failing.
That is in the emergency wards and intensive care units of our hospitals.
Currently - and this is the core, practical problem - we do not have dedicated staff trained to help families through the difficult circumstances which they confront at that point and under which they may consent.
And with the pressures placed on our hospitals - and they are great - it is often difficult for clinicians to have these sensitive and delicate conversations with the families of potential donors.
This problem is compounded by the lack of dedicated hospital resources to manage the clinical procedures necessary for an organ or tissue transplant.
This explains why, despite an increase of one million in the number of organ donor registrations since 2002 to a total of six million registrations, there has been no increase in the number of lives being saved through transplants.
That is what we are trying to solve and deal with through this legislation.
The majority of resources in the national plan will be dedicated to addressing this particular practical problem.
The Australian Organ Donation and Transplantation Authority will work with states, territories, clinicians, consumers and the community sector to build a world leading system for Australia. 
The Authority will:
     * coordinate clinicians and other hospital staff dedicated to organ and tissue donation in hospitals across the country;
     * train professional staff to do that;
     * oversee a new national network of state and territory organ and tissue donation agencies;
     * introduce and manage a national data and reporting system;
     * lead ongoing community awareness programs about organ and tissue donation and transplantation; and
     * work with clinical and professional organisations in developing clinical practice protocols and standards.
The Authority will enable all families of potential donors to be asked about donation.
It will work with clinicians, hospitals and community organisations to educate people about donation, support families through this decision, and make sure that suitable patients will be considered as potential donors.
It will encourage Australians to discuss their wishes with their family - it is a very difficult conversation to have - and provide every family of a potential donor the information, knowledge and support to choose donation.
And as a matter of reassurance, I note that the bill before the House today will in no way impede or restrict existing regulations for ensuring the safety of organ or tissue transplants.
Since making the announcement earlier this year, the government is getting on with the task of putting this system into practice.
All state and territory governments have signed up to the best practice national plan - and I thank them for it. Each of the states is working under the leadership of the Commonwealth Chief Medical Officer to implement this plan.
Work is on track to establish the national authority by 1 January 2009.
The positions of CEO and Medical Director of the new Authority have been advertised.
Recruitment for new medical and nursing jobs in hospitals will commence as soon as possible.
Preparation for a national community awareness campaign for launch in early 2009 is underway.
I would like to conclude my remarks on this bill with a few additional points.
First, I would like to thank those organ donors and the members of families who have lost loved ones and who have assisted at a time of great personal distress and difficulty for them.
Second, I would like to say thank you to the organisations that have played such an important role in promoting awareness of the importance of organ donation and who have helped the development of the government's national plan:
     * The Transplantation Society of Australia and New Zealand;
     * The Cognate Committee on Organ and Tissue Donation;
     * Transplant Australia;
     * Gift of Life;
     * Zaidee's Foundation; and
     * ShareLife.
I would also like to acknowledge the contribution from the Chief Medical Officer, John Horvath, as well as Jane Halton, the Secretary of the Department of Health and Ageing.
Second, on a personal level as recipient of a tissue transplant some years ago, I want to place on record my own debt of gratitude to the doctors, the health professionals and the community that has promoted organ and tissue transplants for so many years.
Finally, I would like to make an appeal to all Australians.
If you are not now on the organ donor list, please think about it and get your name on to it. Maybe that is a practical challenge for us all here: to make sure in the next few weeks that every member of this House and of the other place has made sure that they have made that decision with their family.
I would also make this appeal to the nation's media: get behind this particular proposal. I thank the media for the work that they have already done. I have noticed that whenever our friends in the media get behind this, and we have good and positive stories of successful transplants, one thing happens: effective donation rates go up. This is a critical piece in the jigsaw. I thank the media for what they have done and I encourage them to continue to do it into the future. It really does help.
I appeal to all Australians to talk to their family about this matter. Your family makes critical choices if ever the day arrives when it might be your organs that can save the lives of others.
It is an extraordinary gift of an individual and their family, made in often very tragic circumstances.
Mr Speaker, lifting the level of organ transplants in Australia requires a cooperative and concentrated effort from the Australian government, from state and territory governments, from health professionals, from community organisations and most of all from the whole Australian community.
This bill is a major step forward in coordinating our nation's efforts to save lives and restore quality of life for thousands of Australians.
I thank the officials for their work in preparing this bill, given that I have been more than usually demanding in making sure that this bill was ready on time. I thank them for it, because they have really worked up against it.
So my challenge to the nation is: let's get on with it.
I commend the bill to the House.


I'm delighted to be back this year at the National Student Leadership Forum.
I'd like to make some remarks this morning firstly about leadership, service and character.
I'd also like to speak about how the Government plans to move forward its engagement with young Australians on the future challenges that face our nation. 
Each of you is in a formative stage of life.
A time of enquiry, discovery and learning.
A time when you start building professional skills.
And a time when you form values that will guide future decisions and future directions.
Perhaps the picture of the potter's wheel depicts this better than words.
Character is something like the clay on the potter's wheel, that starts out soft and pliable but slowly takes its shape and solidifies.
Each of you is at a stage in life when your character  -  the way you think and act - is still taking shape.
But as time passes, it becomes harder to change.
That's why it's important that you think consciously about your values now.
To answer three key questions: What do you believe?
Why do you believe it?
And what are you going to do about it?
You shouldn't put those questions off for some time in the future.
It's in this time of your life that you should determine your core beliefs and values.
Because in the years to come, the answers you have to those questions will shape the way you respond to the challenges and opportunities that life will bring.
One of the lessons of life, as of politics, is that you can't predict the future course of events and the opportunities that might come your way.
If we reflect on the lives of some of the greatest leaders of the past century we can see how the path to greatness often doesn't run in a straight line.
(And in passing I'd note that women are sure to be much better represented among the ranks of the great leaders of the new century than the one just gone.)
When John Curtin lost his seat in the election of December 1931 and found himself battling depression and alcoholism, he could have barely imagined that ten years later he'd be called upon to lead Australia through the Second World War, a time when our nation's very survival was at risk.
When Winston Churchill was languishing through his wilderness years in the 1930s, few could have imagined that the great task of leading Britain through it darkest hours would soon fall upon his shoulders.
And when Nelson Mandela was incarcerated in South Africa, for twenty years smashing limestone rocks on Robben Island, he could hardly dare imagine that at the age of 75 he would lead South Africa's peaceful transition to democracy and bury the despicable system of apartheid.  
Life is unpredictable.
None of us know the challenges or opportunities the future might bring.
But what the lives of so many great leaders shows is this:
When opportunity the opportunity comes, you must be prepared.
And the best preparation isn't relentlessly seeking success or self-promotion.
It's not just about building up your social networks or creating a blizzard of publicity.
It is above all, about knowing what you believe, and why you believe it, and what you're going to do about it.
Having a moral compass as you navigate the rocks and shoals of life. 
So often it is adversity that best tests us and prepares us for the future.
Think of Curtin, Churchill and Mandela.
All experienced extraordinary adversity  -  times of devastating discouragement.
The same is true for so many other great women and men.
So often you find that setbacks become the most important turning points in people's lives and careers.
I know this in a small way from my own experience.
When I first stood for Parliament in 1996, I was defeated in an election that saw Labor lose all but two seats in Queensland.
It was not an auspicious start in federal politics.
But it was for me one of life's greatest lessons.
I didn't walk away from public life.
Instead it became a time of learning.
Over the next two and a half years I learned much that I could not have learnt any other way.
About politics, about my local community and about never taking anyone or anything for granted.
So I would say to each of you  -  ambition is a good thing, but in pursuing your ambition you should expect setbacks.
One of my predecessors as Prime Minister once famously remarked that life wasn't meant to be easy.
It's important to expect the hard times, as well as the good times.
But how you handle defeat can matter more than how you handle success.
So be ready to make mistakes; to be let down; to face discouragement and sometimes, to wonder whether you aren't just beating your ahead against a brick wall.
Just like Nelson Mandela, smashing those rocks on Robben Island, day in and day out, for almost twenty years.
That experience formed in him the deep wisdom, the patience and the determination that made him able to help heal the wounds of apartheid and transform his nation's future.
I'd like also to reflect on one other person I regard as one of the greatest Australians in our lifetimes, the asbestos campaigner Bernie Banton, who died on November 27 last year.
An ordinary Australian whose courage, dignity and persistent fight against injustice made him one of the most extraordinary men of our times.
A man who inspired the whole nation - a little Aussie battler, staring down the might of a large corporation.
A man who kept fighting for the fair go for all those victims, despite the debilitating effects of asbestos-related diseases that in effect were slowly closing down his lungs.
Bernie faced more tragedy and hardship than perhaps any of us will ever know.
He'd lost one brother to asbestos, and another was battling disease.
He'd lost friends  -  by last year, less than 10 of his 135 work colleagues from the James Hardie's factory in the 1970s were still alive.
He'd lost his health and he knew asbestos would ultimately cost him his life.
But Bernie never lost hope.
He never lost his determination to fight for what was right.
And he never lost his decency and composure.
He was a man with a deep faith in God and a profound compassion for his fellow man.
But it was Bernie's response to setback after setback that made him such an inspiration and such a leader.
He didn't give up, turn inwards or become bitter, though he'd faced discouragements we could scarcely imagine.
He just fought on so that the James Hardie workers would be supported in the long years of declining health, and so their families weren't left with nothing after they were gone.
There was nothing flash about Bernie  -  not much polish and not too many fine words.
Yet when a generation of politicians will be forgotten, we will still remember Bernie Banton.
Because he inspired us.
Because of his character and his authenticity.
Because he was a true Australian hero. 
Reflecting on Bernie Banton's life, I want to give each of you this challenge.
Don't think that the only pathways to leadership lie in the fields of politics, business, the media and other positions of prominence.
Look also to other pathways where you really can contribute and serve.
Consider, for example, the vocation of teaching.
Few people have as great an impact on a person's life as a great teacher.
It might lack the financial rewards and prestige of finance, law or management, but it is a truly great profession.
The international education research tells us that we need to recruit the best teachers into the classroom.
Because the quality of a school simply can't exceed the quality of its teachers.
Indeed, the quality of teaching is the single greatest influence within schools on student performance.
Each of you is here because you've been spotted as a person of exceptional talent and ability  -  and you should take pride in that.
But what matters most is how you use your talents  -  and specifically, how you use them to make a difference in the lives of those who haven't had the same opportunities as you.
The Government wants to open up more pathways for young Australians to use their talents to make a difference in Australia and abroad.
Last month I announced that the Government plans to create new accelerated pathways to bring talented Australians graduates into teaching roles in disadvantaged schools.
In the United States since 1990, a program along these lines called Teach for America has enjoyed remarkable success.
Highly talented graduates are given an accelerated pathway into teaching, placed into the most challenging school environments and paid at a higher rate.
They also receive mentoring and support from leading businesses and an option of employment after they complete their initial teaching assignment should they choose to leave. 
These programs have given talented young graduates a taste for teaching  -  and many have made it their life profession as a result.
Research has shown just how effective the Teach for America graduates are  -  achieving an impact on student results three times as great as experienced teachers.
The program is so successful that it's now wildly over-subscribed, with 19,000 applicants competing for just 1,500 places each year.
In other words, Teach for America has made teaching “cool” again.
And that's what the Government wants to see happen in Australia.
Teaching might not appeal to you  -  so let me mention some other avenues of service.
The Youth Ambassadors for Development program creates opportunities for young Australians to share their skills and knowledge in developing countries and make a difference in some of the world's poorest nations. 
More than 2,500 young Australians have now participated in that program, contributing to the great global challenge of making poverty history.
This month, 126 new youth ambassadors will leave Australia to take up placements in more than 20 countries.
There's a Climate Change Research Officer based in Bangkok.
A nurse trainer in Fiji.
A Water Supply Coordinator in Indonesia.
A Legal Aid Officer in Laos.
And a Sign Language Trainer in Samoa.
They're not easy jobs, but they make a difference in the lives of people in other nations who have nothing.
In Bac Lieu in Vietnam, one of our Ambassadors has developed a plan to create a safer and more reliable water supply and sanitation system for that city.
As we know, unsafe water supplies so often contribute to disease and infant mortality  -  so a project like that means saving lives.
Another Youth Ambassador in Solomon Islands recently piloted an Associate Diploma in Occupational Therapy at the Solomon Islands College of Higher Education.
That has opened up new career opportunities for young people in the Solomons, as well training people to help those with disabilities who don't currently have access to therapy.
There are many other opportunities for service in the ‘third sector' of community organisations both here and overseas  -  like the internships with Indigenous organisations around Australia offered to hundreds of students by the Aurora Project.
All these projects create opportunities to give something back to the community.
And it is only in giving that we can lead a complete life. 
As St Francis of Assisi said  -  
“for it is in giving that we receive, 
it is in pardoning that we are pardoned, 
and it is in dying that we are born to eternal life.” 
Finally today I would like to make some broader remarks about how the Government intends to move forward with our engagement with young Australians.
The Government I lead believes in a strong engagement with the nation's youth.
That is why we held the Youth 2020 Summit here in Parliament House  -  indeed in this room - earlier this year.
One of the proposals that came out of that Summit was to develop an ongoing dialogue between young Australians and the Government, creating new ways for youth to engage with government to work to tackle common challenges together.
The Government has allocated $8 million in the Budget for this purpose and I'm pleased to announce today that on October 2nd the Australian Youth Forum will be launched by Kate Ellis, the Minister for Youth.
The Forum will provide a framework for engagement across all areas of government policy.
The Government will also be commissioning the new Office for Youth to compile a new report on the State of Australia's Young People  -  a report that will help us to identify future priorities for Government policy, and in particular, where young Australians are needing more support.
Further, the Minister for Youth will be commissioning work on what has been identified in a major national survey as the top concerns of Australian youth (1) -  healthy body image.
We all experience the relentless daily media bombardment of images that distort the expectations that many young women and men have relating to their body image.
We are realistic about the limitations on a government's ability to tackle such a pervasive problem.
But we recognise the negative impact it has on the confidence and esteem of so many young Australians.
And working with young Australians, we want to identify positive steps we can take to address this difficult problem.
Again I'd like to congratulate each one of you for being selected to participate in this year's forum.
It isn't easy to get the time to stand back and reflect upon the big questions of life, but this is one such opportunity.
I hope that some of you can look back on this weekend in twenty years' time and reflect on it as a time that helped you establish your bearings and how to apply them to the benefit of others.
That is what leadership is about  -  it begins with service.
Effective leadership serves people first.
And it is the pathway to a deeply fulfilling life.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Mission Australia's National Survey of Young Australians 2007 covering 29,000 respondents


We gather together at a time of great challenge to the international system.
A challenge that reminds us afresh that we live in a world where our interdependence is now greater than at any time before.
An interdependence that therefore demands our international cooperation now, more than at any time before.
There are many who criticise the United Nations.
And those of us who know this institution well know that it is not immune from criticism.
But those who argue against the United Nations advance no credible argument as to what should replace it.
Whatever its imperfections, the United Nations represents a necessary democracy of states.
States who resolved out of the carnage of the last World War that cooperation should always be preferred to conflict.
That our national interests are invariably best served by the simultaneous prosecution of the international interest.
That the purposes of our common humanity should prevail over the narrow interests of the few.
When the nations of the world met at San Francisco in 1945, the United Nations was conceived as a bold experiment.
One which ran contrary to the grain of the international order that had preceded it, where conflict was the norm and cooperation the exception.
One where the international community, for the first time, began to imagine how through an international institution we could protect not just the sovereignty of states, but equally advance the protection of peoples and the dignity of individuals.
And beyond this, we began to advance the idea that through the other great international institutions  -  the World Bank, the IMF, the GATT and the ILO  -  that we could fashion an international economic order that recognised the unfolding reality of economic interdependence.
These were the ideals we set for ourselves more than half a century ago.
And while the history of our achievements since then has been mixed, the ideas and ideals on which these institutions were constructed nevertheless remain as valid now as they were back then.
The failures that we have seen in recent times do not lie in the institutions alone.
The failure lies more in the poverty of our political will to animate these institutions to discharge the purposes for which they were created.
And that, distinguished delegates, is our collective responsibility.
The global financial crisis of today presents us afresh with a critical opportunity to act comprehensively and collectively for the long term  -  rather than selectively and separately for the short.
In the post-war period, the quantum of financial institutional failure seen these last weeks has been great.
The quantum of government intervention in financial markets has been significant.
And the quantum of the impact of one market on another has been unprecedented.
What we have seen in financial markets should bring home to us all that the central organising principle of this 21st century is interdependence.
For the century just past, interdependence may have been one option among many.
For the century that is to come, there is no longer an alternative.
Interdependence is not the expression of sentimental idealism.
Instead it is a recognition of the new realism of our current time.
This represents the cumulative impact of the globalisation of our engagement with each other over many decades.
Through unprecedented trade flows, unprecedented investment flows and unprecedented financial flows, we now see the globalisation of economy.
The globalisation of security  -  arising from the searing impact of September 11 when the obscenity visited on this great city caused us all to conclude that terrorism was the enemy of all of civilised humanity, not just of some nations.
And the globalisation of the environment  -  as we have come to recognise that carbon emissions from one part of the planet affects all parts of the planet  -  and therefore radically affects the future of the planet itself.
For what all these things tell us is this: that interdependence is the new realism of this 21st century.
And unless as a community of nations we rise to this new challenge our future is bleak indeed.
Mr President, the global financial crisis is a call to the global community to act.
Financial markets are a public good.
The stability of global financial markets is a public good.
If governments fail to protect this public good, then those who suffer are the working people of the world whose jobs, whose homes, and whose standard of living depends on it.
It is governments rather than speculators that have the central responsibility for determining the rules that govern the way markets work.
A decade ago the global economy and global financial markets were buffeted by the Asian financial crisis.
And as a global community we resolved that we would act to reduce the risk of such systemic crises in the future.
The problem is, a decade on, systemic lessons were not learnt.
And now we face a financial crisis of truly global proportions.
We must, therefore, ask ourselves three questions:
     * what went wrong;
     * what needs to be done now to fix the problem of financial market instability for the long term; and most critically
     * how we marshal the political will to do so.
First, what went wrong.
There has been a failure of internal governance within financial institutions.
There has also been a failure of external oversight.
Regulators have not always recognised the systemic risk posed by significant financial institutions.
So what must now be done?
The immediate task is to rebuild confidence in the financial system, by ensuring that central banks provide adequate liquidity, by enabling the recapitalisation of critical financial institutions and by ensuring the continued solvency of these institutions.
Over the longer term, the challenge is to reform financial markets and regulatory systems to reduce the chances of these events repeating themselves in the future.
To this end, together with other states, we would argue that the following reform program be implemented:
First, systemically important financial institutions should be licensed to operate in major economies only under the condition that they make full disclosure and analysis of balance sheet and off-balance sheet exposures.
Systemically important financial institutions are not just commercial banks, but can include investment banks, insurance companies, hedge funds and financial clearing houses.
Which institutions are systemically important will vary by one country and over time. 
The central bank in each country should have responsibility for financial system stability.
This should be embedded in globally agreed best practice standards of financial regulation  -  and assessed by the International Monetary Fund.
Second, we need to ensure that banks and other financial institutions build up capital in good times as a buffer for bad times, using predictable rules.
Supervisory frameworks need to be counter-cyclical, not pro-cyclical.
The Basel rules need to address this. 
Third, financial institutions need to have clear incentives to  promote responsible behaviour rather than unrestrained greed. 
Regulators should set higher capital requirements for financial firms that have executive remuneration packages that reward short term returns or excessive risk taking.
And again the Basel rules also need to address this.
Fourth, supervisory systems must be compatible with accounting principles that reflect reasonable assessments of the value of assets over time. 
We need to make sure accounting rules foster a more medium-term perspective and do not encourage institutions to think that risk is low just because current asset prices are high, or recent asset-price volatility has been low. 
The Basel rules also need to address this. 
And fifth, the IMF should be given a strengthened mandate for prudential analysis.
Conservative and consistent prudential standards should be applied to all financial institutions of systemic significance.
Furthermore, the IMF and the Financial Stability Forum should develop early warning systems of impending institutional vulnerabilities and provide advice on remedial policies.
Collectively, these institutions have led the development of the initiatives which represent the core of the financial market reform agenda, which I have just described.
However, these institutions are by their very nature bureaucratic. And the reform processes they initiate are constrained by a lack of political authority.
So I come to the third question which arises from the current crisis: how are we to go about implementing this reform agenda for the long term?
What is required is political will  -  exercised through ministerial forums working in cooperation with the IMF, the Financial Stability Forum and the G-20.
The G-20 is well placed to provide political authority to have these actions implemented urgently and comprehensively.
In this context,
     * Australia will work intensively with the forthcoming chairs of G-20, in particular the UK in 2009, to ensure that financial stability is at the centre of the work program and to initiate arrangements to strengthen G-20 input into shaping the work of the IMF and the Financial Stability Forum and implementation of agreed outcomes. 
     * At their meeting in November, the G-20 Finance Ministers should review progress in adopting the current Financial Stability Forum recommendations, and reinforce the agreed deadlines for finalising their implementation, and agree with the Financial Stability Forum a clear timetable for the action plan.
     * As the systemically important economies, G-20 members should demonstrate their commitment to best-practice financial regulation and disclosure, by providing better information on the stability of their domestic financial systems and cross-border exposures to the IMF and Financial Stability Forum. 
     * The IMF and the Financial Stability Forum should provide regular scenario analysis to the G-20 to facilitate clear engagement on the risks facing the global financial system.  This analysis should be included in an enhanced version of the IMF's Global Financial Stability Report. 
Distinguished delegates, the purpose of this reform agenda is to provide a real political mandate for our international regulatory institutions to do their job in defending the integrity of the international financial system.
Mr President, one of the greatest challenges we face is climate change and the threat it poses to the environment.
In December last year, after many years delay, the Australia ratified the Kyoto Protocol.
We are determined to be part of the solution to climate change  -  not just a part of the problem.
We have acted to begin the process of developing a comprehensive emissions trading or carbon pollution reduction scheme to bring down CO2 emissions over time.
We will also implement a national energy efficiency strategy, as well as a renewable energy strategy.
Developing and deploying new technologies will also be part of our response to climate change.
The Australian Government has decided to establish a global centre to drive the demonstration and commercialisation of carbon capture and storage technologies.
This project  -  building on existing national and regional initiatives  -  will bring together the best researchers in the world to develop the best technology to apply.
As the world at present is planning to generate 45 per cent of its electricity from coal in 2030, we can no longer afford to delay to act on this technology.
Delegates, Australia invites all governments and corporations of good will to participate in this Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute.
Mr President, the United Nations, and we its member nations, have a responsibility to protect the nations and the peoples of the world.
We must protect people from terrorism.
And this must include commitment to support those nations in the frontline of the struggle.
Australia is working closely with the Government of Afghanistan and our global partners to bring security and stability to that country.
We can never again allow that nation to become a haven for terrorists.
Australia is also an active contributor to global efforts to prevent the spread of weapons of mass destruction.
We continue to urge nations to sign and ratify the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty so that it can enter into force.
We remain concerned that states such as Iran and North Korea continue to defy the international community and fail to comply with demands for a full declaration and accounting of their nuclear programs.
Their actions are undermining the global consensus to contain the spread of nuclear weapons.
This year the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty - the NPT- celebrates its 40th anniversary.
As a middle power and as a long-standing member of the NPT, Australia is committed to working with other nations towards the goal of the eventual abolition of nuclear weapons.
Australia  -  with our close friend and partner Japan  -  has established an International Commission on Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament to create the political and policy consensus necessary to elicit a real result on non-proliferation and disarmament in advance of the 2010 Review Conference.
The United Nations' own security machinery must also be effective.
The Security Council needs reform.
Australia supports the expansion of its permanent membership to reflect changes in the world since 1945.
And our nation, Australia will be a candidate for a non-permanent seat for the 2013-2014 term.
Australia once again wishes to play its part in advancing the international security order.
Mr President, prosperity comes from economic growth.
It comes from nations trading with each other.
That's why it is so important that we conclude the Doha round of world trade talks this year.
That's why we must also implement the Millennium Development Goals consistent with our solemn commitment in this place at the dawn of this millennium.
Progress against the goals has been mixed.
We need to redouble our efforts to reduce poverty, provide education for children and ensure that people in the developing world have access to health care.
Australia is committed to increasing official development assistance to 0.5 per cent of gross national income by 2015.
Australia now resolves to do much more, much, much more to make poverty history.
It is unforgivable that poverty and conflict  -  such as that in Darfur  -  continues to claim the lives of innocents in the face of inaction by governments.
Development is also about protecting human rights.
Sixty years ago this Chamber adopted the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
We must commit afresh to the protection of the rights that  that charter identifies.
As nations we should also commit afresh to righting past wrongs.
In Australia we began this recently with the first Australians  -  the oldest continuing culture in human history.
On behalf of the Australian Parliament, this year I offered an apology to Indigenous Australians for the wrongs they had suffered in the past.
This was the right thing for Australia to do.
Mr President, our membership of the United Nations is a key pillar of our foreign policy.
Our priorities are regional, but our interests are global.
We work with partners around the world to meet shared challenges.
Through our membership of the United Nations, we are committed to using creative middle power diplomacy to help overcome the great challenges of our age.
Challenges which lie beyond the power of individual nation states to resolve.
Challenges which can only be solved by unprecedented cooperation between states.
Because in this chamber, and through the organs of the United Nations, the problems we seek to solve touch every one of our peoples.
To advance prosperity and stability at home, we must advance prosperity and stability around the globe.
Australia was one of the founding members of the United Nations.
Our Foreign Minister at the time, Dr Evatt, made a significant contribution at the San Francisco Conference, particularly on the part of small and medium countires.
He ensured that the role of the General Assembly was protected in the structure of the organisation as a whole.
And 60 years ago this week he was elected President of the Third General Assembly.
Evatt was a patriotic Australian.
Evatt was equally a passionate internationalist.
Sixty years later, this institution, together with other international institutions of our current order, have yet to realise the vision of those who founded it.
Yet the need today in this age of unprecedented global interdependence, is greater than ever before.
And so distinguished delegates, it falls to this generation to now summon the political faith  -  and to exercise the political will necessary  -  to act for the common purposes of the planet we all share.
I thank you


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
Tonight, here in Australia we wait, watch and listen with our heads turned towards Washington and those legislators who will determine the America's national response to this most dire financial crisis.
When events the magnitude of which we have witnessed in the last week take place, we sometimes struggle to find a sense of proportion.
But if we lose that sense of proportion and perspective, we may misjudge and overreact.
That's why it is important to focus on how stability can be restored to the global financial system.
And why it is also important to outline, in clear, calm and objective terms, the great strength of the Australian financial system.
The strength of the Australian economy.
The strength of the Australian budget position.
And how the Government intends to steer Australia through this global economic storm.
Australia is not immune from the problems in the United States.
However we are better placed than most countries to weather the storm.
     * We have first class regulators.
     * Australia has four of the world's 20 AA rated banks.
     * We have about 1% of sub prime loans versus about 15% in the United States.
     * Our arrears rates are more than five times lower than the United States.
     * We have budgeted for a strong budget surplus as a buffer for the future that is the envy of the developed world. By contrast, six of the seven largest economies are currently running Budget deficits.
The Australian economy is resilient, flexible and strong, and the Government is confident it will steer Australia through the global economic storm that lies ahead.
And whereas five of the world's largest economies already have recorded zero or negative growth this year, Australia continues to generate positive economic growth.
We should not forget that the Australian stock market suffered a 25 percent drop in one day in 1987.
The market recovered from that fall.
Our market will in time recover from the current volatility.
It's worth remembering that 1987 was also the year the movie “Wall Street” premiered in New York and Gordon Gekko entered our lexicon when he sought to sum up the philosophy, for lack of a better word, of a generation of financiers with that chilling declaration: “Greed is good”.
The “greed-is-good” era brought the stock market crash of 1987, the savings and loans debacle in the United States and the global recession which gripped many countries in the early 1990s. 
It is perhaps time now to admit that we did not learn the full lessons of the greed-is-good ideology.
And today we are still cleaning up the mess of the twenty-first century children of Gordon Gecko.
At a technical level, the current financial crisis is the unwinding of the extraordinary global credit boom of recent years.
It is a rapid shift and dislocation in the credit market cycle.
The top of the cycle was characterised by a period of strong economic growth, low cost of capital and rapid increases in asset prices, most notably in housing markets and share markets.
These conditions created a financial boom in which credit became widely available and relatively cheap.
In particular there was a rush to purchase real estate.
For a short time, the real estate boom was a self-fulfilling proposition. Low capital costs and high demand for housing caused house prices to keep rising  -  a classic ‘asset bubble' began to develop.
At the same time, advances in information technology and financial engineering saw the emergence of sophisticated new financial instruments and structured assets.
These assets were purchased by investment banks, hedge funds and other financial institutions.
But regulatory frameworks did not always keep up with the rapid pace of change. The risks inherent in these financial innovations were not always well understood.
As the housing bubble burst, it triggered a wave of home foreclosures and asset write downs that, as Americans have been saying, have rocked both Wall Street and Main Street.
That's the technical debate.
But it also points to a broader debate about corporate values and, for that matter, a debate about the general values of our current age.
Beneath the financial jargon and dramatic stock market events, the sub-prime crisis has also reflected a fundamental failure of values.
We've seen the triumph of greed over integrity.
The triumph of speculation over value creation.
The triumph of the short term over long term, sustainable growth.
The fact is that Gordon Gekko wasn't tamed in 1987  -  he was simply ignored.
The fact is that much of the root cause of the sub prime crisis came down to our financial markets rewarding people for taking extravagant risks.
Executives earned massive bonuses.
Their rewards were skewed to short term “success” rather than long term creation of asset value.
Corporate governance structures encouraged short term paper results over long term measurable achievement.
Angelo Mozilo, the CEO of Countrywide Financial, the largest sub-prime lender made more than $270 million between 2004 and 2007 before its collapse.
Stanley O'Neal, the former chief executive of Merrill Lynch, was paid $US100 million in the last two years as a result of the massive profits the bank made during the subprime housing bubble.  When the bubble burst, Merrill Lynch suffered massive losses which obliterated the earlier gains, yet their executives had no obligation to pay any money back.
They literally laughed all the way to the bank.
Perverse financial values were also on display in the American retail mortgage market. 
The ‘originate and distribute' model of mortgage lending encouraged mortgage providers to unscrupulously provide finance to borrowers who often did not have the capacity to repay the loans.
Mortgage salespeople preyed on the aspirations of vulnerable families, soliciting them to take out home loans.
Lenders confused working class people, non-English speaking families and first time borrowers with hidden fees, ratchet interest rates, and confusing repayment terms.
Predatory financers inflated borrower's income and overstated their ability to pay back a loan.
These were the most obvious manifestations of the culture of greed and short-termism which pervaded large parts of the American financial sector.
This culture was never challenged by a political and economic ideology of extreme capitalism.
And this crisis bears the fingerprints of the extreme free market ideologues who influence much of the neo-liberal economic elite.
Free market ideologues who have a naïve belief that unrestrained markets are always self-correcting and that markets left to themselves will always achieve optimum outcomes.
Ideologues who believe that any regulation of private business is fundamentally wrong.
Ideologues who have resisted the regulation of financial markets and the supervision of a wide range of financial institutions.
Ideologues who lectured the developing countries caught up in the Asian Financial Crisis a decade ago about the need for transparency and disclosure, but did little to reform their own financial systems.
Ideologues who believe that government is always the problem, never the solution.
Except of course when there is a crash  -  then, the self-same ideologues argue, having privatised their profits, we should socialise their losses.
And by the way, having demanded lower and lower taxes all the way through.
When we are through the current crisis it will be time therefore to take stock.
Not to overreact - but rather, for the world to calmly take stock of what went wrong, as we pursue the reforms necessary to restore long-term confidence and stability to global financial markets.
Global financial markets require global financial regulation based on the fundamental principles of transparency, conservative prudential standards and, above all, universality.
That is why the Australian Government has put forward at the United Nations and prospectively at the International Monetary Fund, a five part regulatory reform program for consideration and implementation by all governments.
There is an alternative political and policy narrative to the one that has tended to prevail in recent times.
A narrative that recognises the importance of markets, but one that also recognises the limitations of markets and recognises also where markets fail.
A narrative that recognises the role of public goods.
A narrative that recognises that one of those public goods is market regulation. 
A narrative that values transparency, competition and innovation  -  but one that does not encourage speculation nor reward for merely short-term success.
A political and corporate culture that values profitability and productivity achieved through hard work  -  but one that does not endorse the Gordon Gekko ethic of the quick buck, based on little more than a single financial transaction.
We believe that market participants need strong incentives and rewards for success.
But we believe that their success should be measured over a sustainable horizon. 
We believe in strong incentives for individuals, but we also believe that trust and traditional ethical standards are essential elements of the financial system.
We believe strongly in the profit motive.
But we also believe in responsibility to the community where those profits are made - a belief increasingly evident in Australian corporate philanthropic behaviour.
I say again, when we are through this crisis, it will be time to take stock.
And through informed debate in political and corporate Australia as well as the media of the virus, the disease, some would say the epidemic, of short-termism that also threatens Australia's long term future.
Because across the length and breadth of the nation, the cry of the people is clear  -  and that is for a long term, sustainable vision for the nation's future.
One that goes beyond the electoral cycle.
That goes beyond a quarterly corporate reporting cycle.
And one that certainly goes beyond the 24 hour news cycle.
A long term vision that embraces:
     * long term planning on the nation's productivity agenda;
     * long term planning on the nation's workforce participation agenda;
     * long term planning on the nation's infrastructure - our ports, our rail, our high speed broadband;
     * long term planning for the ageing of the population;
     * long term planning for the economic and environmental impact of climate change;
     * long term planning for water and for agriculture in this, the world's driest continent, and
     * long term planning for our engagement with the Asia Pacific century.
The Government I lead is not just committed to responsible economic management for the immediate term.
The Government I lead is determined to be a nation-building government for the long term.
And beyond this overriding emphasis on the long term, after a decade so much squandered on the short term, we must also encourage a much wider community debate on the corporate and political values we hold dear  -  a debate between short-term gratification and long term vision.
A debate that brings to a head how we shape the reward structures of corporate Australia.
A debate about how we assess the long term values of companies, their executives and their assets against their long term performance - as opposed to short-term asset bubbles.
And this is very much a values debate  -  Gordon Gekko, greed and immediate gratification as against a culture that values a fair go, that values hard work and that values thinking about and preparing for tomorrow.
The Australian Government has been proactive throughout the global financial crisis that has been with us since our first day in office.
We have responded to events as they unfold, often anticipating them, and putting in place policies, programs and measures to better prepare Australia for the period ahead.
We have acted to promote stability, transparency and confidence in national financial markets.
The Australian Government has also been actively involved in designing the global regulatory recommendations coming out of the Financial Stability Forum created by the G7.
Australian financial authorities (APRA, ASIC, RBA and the Treasury), are also taking action to address each of the five areas identified by the Forum including:
     * strengthened prudential oversight of capital, liquidity and risk management;
     * enhancing transparency and valuation;
     * changes in the role and uses of credit ratings;
     * strengthening the authorities' responsiveness to risks, and
     * robust arrangements for dealing with stress in the financial system.
And here at home, the Government has been working to strengthen our domestic financial system.
Earlier this year the Australian Government began working on legislation to improve disclosure requirements around short selling. The exposure draft of this legislation has now been released.
And, more recently, ASIC has acted in concert with regulators around the world to put temporary restrictions on short selling.
In May this year, the Government announced that it would increase its issuance of Commonwealth Government Securities as part of the Government's commitment to the effective operation of Australia's financial markets.
We provided legislative authority for an increase in future Commonwealth Government Securities issuance of up to $25 billion to strengthen the robustness of Australia's financial system and reduce its vulnerability to adverse shocks.
In September the Government announced that the Australian Office of Financial Management would be authorised to purchase Australian residential mortgage-backed securities  -  a measure made possible by legislation introduced and passed back in June. 
This will strengthen effective competition in Australia's mortgage markets.
The Government has also been active in advancing consumer protection in Australia's credit markets. In April, the Financial Stability Forum recommended that authorities review and, where necessary, strengthen deposit insurance arrangements.
Following this, the Government announced in June the adoption of a Financial Claims Scheme.
The financial claims scheme will ensure depositors and insurance policyholders with Authorised Deposit Taking Institutions (ADIs) have quick access to their money up to a defined threshold.
Also in June, the Government proposed the Commonwealth take responsibility for regulating all consumer credit.
Three months later, COAG agreed to create uniform national credit regulation with a view to closing loopholes and cracking down on unscrupulous lending.
These are concrete measures in many areas to promote competitiveness, transparency and proper consumer protection in our financial markets  -  and above all to maintain confidence and stability.
That is why we have also called on banks to act responsibly and competitively in response to any RBA rate cut next week.
The easiest thing the government could do would be to take the populist approach.
But the global financial crisis is real and it is affecting global financial stability, and financial instability has very serious consequences for Australian families.  
Of course we want to see the Liberals' high interest rates come down.
Ten interest rate rises in a row under the Liberals.
And last month (aided by this Government's fiscal policy settings) we saw the first interest rate cut in seven years.
Of course we will welcome a cut in interest rates.
And we will press for those to be passed on to the absolute maximum extent  -  a maximum that is consistent with maintaining the stability of the financial system.
But if the choice is between the sober advice of the financial regulator and any rank act of political populism, the Government will choose the advice of regulators - even if taking that advice proves to be politically popular.
The first responsibility of any government is maintaining the stability of Australia's financial system at a time of almost unprecedented global financial crisis.
Our major Australian commercial banks are in a strong position.
And that must continue to be the case.
And this is equally important for all the mums and dads, all the working families, all the pensioners and carers  -  who together have a fundamental interest in the stability of the Australian banking system.
Particularly at a time when the world has recently seen more than 25 banks fail or needing to be bailed out.
These policy responses and reforms to domestic and international financial markets are part of the Government's broader economic reform agenda.
Australia, like other nations, faces tough economic times ahead because of the state of the global economy.
That is why the Government is committed to strong, responsible economic management anchored in a strong budget surplus.
That is also why the Government has a plan to boost long-term productivity growth through a comprehensive economic reform program based on an education revolution to make our workforce the best trained in the world, our nation-building infrastructure plan, investing in the technologies of the future and our tax and regulation reform plan.
That means maximising Australia's economic competitiveness in an increasingly competitive - and now, increasingly unpredictable - world.
My vision for Australia is a modern economy with the best educated, best trained, best skilled workforce in the world.
My vision for Australia is also the country with the best 21st century infrastructure in the world.
And my vision for Australia at the dawn of the Asia-Pacific century is for Australia to be the most Asia-literate (and China-literate) country in the western world.
Our economic program for the future is built on three building blocks.
Responsible Economic Management
The first step to ensuring stability is through macroeconomic management. This is achieved through a prudent fiscal policy and a central bank with independent carriage of monetary policy.
It is why we delivered a strong budget surplus as a buffer for the future.
And that is why we have increased the independence of the Reserve Bank of Australia.
Boosting Productivity: Education, Infrastructure and Deregulation
Second, beyond stability, the Government's role is to ensure the provision of critical inputs for a modern economy to boost long-term productivity growth.
Productivity growth has been faltering in recent years.
We must turn this around because productivity growth is the only effective guarantee of non-inflationary growth in living standards in the future.
The Government must ensure the provision of high quality education, training, and infrastructure.
This plan starts with an education revolution  -  a substantial and sustained increase in the quantity of our investment in, and in the quality of our education system.
Alongside education, the Government's other key priority for expanding Australia's productive capacity is infrastructure.
Inadequate infrastructure is a handbrake on growth.
That is why the new Government has embarked upon a program of nation building.
We have appointed a Minister for Infrastructure and created an advisory body, Infrastructure Australia, led by Sir Rod Eddington.
Infrastructure Australia is auditing Australia's current infrastructure bottlenecks, auditing our infrastructure needs for the future and developing the nation's first infrastructure priority list.
We will work together with Australian State governments to build on their world's best practice instruments, including public-private partnerships - to enable private companies to finance, design, construct, operate and maintain innovative infrastructure to deliver public goods.
Yesterday, COAG agreed to bring forward our timetable for determining future infrastructure priorities  -  a core part of the Government's nation-building agenda.
And COAG has agreed on a goal of embracing nationally consistent PPP guidelines by year's end.
In partnership with State governments, we have also identified 27 areas for deregulation and red tape reduction to improve efficiency and reduce the regulatory burden on the economy  -  in practical areas such as establishing a one-stop shop for registering a business name for all of Australia, as well as establishing a national consumer policy framework.
The overall mission is clear: building long term productivity growth so that Australia's long term economic future is secure, without being totally captive to the ups and downs of the mining boom.
Economic engagement with Asia
A third building block for our economic future is our policy of comprehensive economic engagement with Asia  -  as Asia will drive global economic growth for much of the 21st century.
In August we concluded negotiations for a region-wide ASEAN-Australia-New Zealand Free Trade Agreement (AANZFTA). 
In terms of coverage this is the largest FTA Australia has ever negotiated.  It covers 16 per cent of Australia's trade in goods and services, worth $71 billion and targets a big market of 570 million people with a combined GDP of US$1 trillion. 
In addition to good market access, it will provide much greater certainty for Australian investors.
During my visit to China in April I agreed with Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao that we would unfreeze our FTA negotiations which had stalled. 
Since then we have had two rounds of constructive negotiations with a third scheduled in December. 
China is Australia's largest trading partner with two-way trade in goods and services of $58 billion in 2007.  Our exports are already growing at around 20 per cent annually. 
The FTA should accelerate this through better market access.  We are particularly focussing on achieving results on services, especially financial services.
We are also stepping up the pace of our FTA negotiations with Japan after my visit in June.  The seventh round will be held this month. 
I agreed with the new Japanese Prime Minister Taro Aso in our meeting in New York last Thursday that we would accelerate these negotiations as Japan remains our largest export market. 
Following agreement with President Lee during my visit in August, the first round of preparatory talks for an FTA with the Republic of Korea will take place in two weeks in Seoul. 
The Republic of Korea is our fourth largest export market but out trade has been limited to a few major commodities.  Its potential has been neglected.  We now want to expand and diversify the economic relationship.
We have also accelerated our FTA feasibility study with India, which will now report this year.  India is already our sixth largest merchandise export market and eighth largest services market but the potential is far greater. 
The Government takes economic engagement and integration with Asia seriously.
China's extraordinary economic growth has been a driving force behind the period of very strong global economic growth experienced between 2003 and 2007.
Indeed, China was also a stabilising force during the Asian financial crisis in 1997.
China provided a stable export market for many of the countries that suffered from the economic turmoil.
China also contributed financial resources to the IMF rescue packages for Thailand and other Asian economies.
Despite domestic economic pressures, China also resisted devaluing the Renminbi.  
This helped to maintain the export competitiveness of their Asian neighbours during the crisis and the overall stability of the region.
China also has a strong interest in contributing to the resolution of the current global financial crisis and the restoration of strong global economic growth.
China has in recently days made some important statements on the global financial crisis.
President Hu Jintao has welcomed the US Administration's Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP) to buy up distressed financial assets, noting that China hoped these measures can achieve quick results to improve economic and financial conditions in the US.
Addressing the United Nations last week, Premier Wen Jiabao also made a commitment that China would play its part in addressing the global financial crisis, including through enhanced financial coordination. 
And at the World Economic Forum meeting in Tianjin last weekend, the Chairman of the China Banking Reform Commission, Liu Mingkang, called for the establishment of a global regulatory system that is in keeping with the global financial system.
In view of China's important role in restoring stability and ensuring future global expansion, these are important statements.
As I mentioned in my own remarks to the UN General Assembly last week, the G-20 should play a major role in supporting reform of the global financial system.
China, as a member of the G-20, can significantly assist these efforts, including through supporting financial stability being at the centre of the G-20's work program.  We look forward to working closely with China in strengthening the global financial system.
China can also support the broader implementation of the Financial Stability Forum's recommendations through Asia.
In recent years China has also been playing an increasingly role in global financial markets.
It is estimated that at the middle of this year, Chinese institutions were holding around $500 billion US dollars worth of US treasury bonds and $200 billion in US asset-backed securities.
The current instabilities that are concentrated in the US should not be taken as a signal to China to retreat from integration and globalisation. 
We need to address the problems that have given rise to the current crisis, and not withdraw or huddle down into ourselves.
China's friends, including Australia, must continue to encourage China to continue to play the positive role in the global economy and financial system it has in the past.
It is important we make it clear that China's ongoing economic and financial integration is important, and this integration is firmly in the interests of China, the interests of Australia, and the interests of the global economy.
It is important now for western nations to demonstrate our positive support for China as a responsible stakeholder in the global economy and in major financial institutions.
Indeed with many financial institutions in the US and Europe now requiring recapitalisation, this is a time when China  -  alongside other economies such as Japan and Korea - can play an important role in strengthening global financial stability.
Chinese institutions have the liquidity to take stakes in those US and European institutions.
Such investments should not cause alarm in western nations.
They are a natural reflection of the structural changes in the global economy.
The 21st century economic reality is that China is now a major economic and financial powerhouse.
By whatever measure you wish to use, China's economy is on course to becoming the world's largest during the first half of this century.
Strong growth in the Chinese economy is now crucial to the global economy  -  just as strong export-driven growth in China has been dependent on the health of the global economy.
It is in every nation's interest for China to strengthen its links to the global economy and to become an increasingly positive stakeholder in the global economy.
That is why we welcome the recent decision by the People's Bank of China to reduce its lending rate by 0.27 basis points, demonstrating the Government's willingness to stimulate the economy if growth continues to slow.
That is why we also welcome recent statements by the Chinese leadership that China's best contribution to the global financial system is for China to strongly grow its economy.
And it is why we should also welcome further Chinese investment in global financial institutions.
Such investments would have a stabilising influence on global financial markets, diversifying and strengthening the investment base of those financial institutions.
It is also important that China participates in building the future architecture of global trade by helping revive the Doha Round, where China  -  and Australia - have a strong interest in achieving an outcome that can underpin strong future economic growth.
China has played a constructive role in negotiations to date.
China can now be an even more positive force in these negotiations in the future  -  helping to shape a final agreement among the key parties.
A positive outcome on Doha would not just lift global economic growth in the longer term  -  it would also provide a shot in the arm for international confidence in the short term.
On the key challenges facing the international community  -  the global financial crisis, the future of global trade and climate change  -  for China to be engaged and participating as a responsible stakeholder is strongly in the interests of China, Australia and the global community.
Developments in global financial markets in recent times have been of truly seismic proportions.
Both the scope of institutional failure and the scale of government intervention in financial markets have been unprecedented.
As the IMF noted yesterday in its latest World Economic Outlook, “the financial turmoil that began in the summer of 2007 has mutated into a full-blown crisis".
There is a lot of jargon in financial markets.
Terms like short-selling, systemic risk, collatoralised debt obligations might seem to be a world away from the lives of ordinary Australians.
But the fact is that financial stability is a public good which has a very direct effect on all Australians.
If we fail to protect this public good  -  that is the stability of Australian financial markets - then those who suffer are the working people whose jobs, whose savings, whose homes, and whose standard of living depend on it.
That is why the Government is acting responsibly to support the stability of the Australian financial sector.
That is why we are acting with our partners around the world to assist in restoring stability to global financial markets.
And these are responsibilities that this Australian Government is determined to discharge.


The events of the last few weeks have had a profound effect on the global economy.
We have seen more than 25 banks fail or need to be bailed out around the world.
We have seen an unprecedented financial sector rescue package in the US of almost $1 trillion.
We have seen reverberations across Europe.
We in Australia are not immune from these global developments of epic proportions.
These developments will affect growth.
They will affect employment.
They will affect government revenues.
But the Australian Government has set a policy course to see Australia through the current crisis.
The cornerstone of this strategy is to maintain the stability of the Australian financial system  -  critical for the national economy, and critical for the household economy.
This will require tough decisions.
Some of which will be unpopular.
All of which however are necessary.
Necessary to maintain the stability of our financial system.
Another cornerstone of the Government's economic strategy is nation-building to secure our future.
Today's conference provides a unique opportunity to bring together the nation-building commitment of governments and the nation-building expertise of the private sector.
An opportunity for us to work together to help shape the future of our nation's infrastructure.
This is an historic task.
In our vast nation, infrastructure has always been fundamental to our national development.
From the building of the railways in the 19th century, to vast projects like the Snowy Mountains hydro scheme in the middle of the twentieth century, to the building of the urban infrastructure that made possible the growth of our cities in the 1970s  -  visionary nation-building plans have long been fundamental to Australia's economic growth and development.
The Government I lead is committed to renewing this vision for nation-building in the 21st century  -  and that is why today's summit is important.
In this room we have leaders in infrastructure ranging across planning, construction, finance and project management.
We have policy leadership.
We have business leadership.
We have academic leadership.
And we have the representatives of all levels of government.
The Government I lead is committed to an ambitious nation-building agenda.
That doesn't mean lifting our infrastructure investment by just a few percentage points.
It means delivering a transformational vision for the infrastructure of the 21st century.
Today's conference is about taking the next steps in transforming our national investment in infrastructure.
The conference will deal with the needs of individual sectors:
     * urban transport and design;
     * freight transport;
     * water;
     * energy; and
     * information and communications technology.
The conference will also deal with the functional challenges that cut across all infrastructure sectors:
     * Skills shortages;
     * Finance;
     * Institutional reform; and
     * Demand management policies.
Put simply, as a nation we can no longer afford to waste time  -  we must get our infrastructure decisions right.
Australian economic conditions
The Australian Government is committed to steering Australia through tough global economic times to ensure our economy emerges in strong shape.
While we face tough times, Australia is in a better shape to weather this storm than most other nations:
     * Our major financial institutions are well capitalised and profitable.
     * Our regulatory framework is world class.
     * Sub-prime mortgage loans account for only 1 per cent of the mortgage market compared to around 15 per cent in the US.
     * Our economy continues to grow, although slower than forecast in the Budget) while nearly all G7 economies are now experiencing negative growth.
     * Our budget surplus is strong while once again nearly all other major economies are in significant budget deficit.
     * Australian businesses are planning for a record $100 billion of capital expenditure for 2008-09.
     * Our export revenues are growing strongly. 
The Government's economic strategy embraces:
     * a strong budget surplus as a buffer for the future and to be used to meet the challenges of the future;
     * a comprehensive strategy of microeconomic reform to boost long-term productivity growth; and
     * a $76 billion nation-building plan for the future  -  to also help create jobs for the future. 
The Australian Government is committed to responsible economic management, with a strong Budget surplus as a buffer for the future.
We achieved that surplus by reprioritising spending and cutting back on waste, implementing a total of $33 billion of savings over a four year period.
As a share of GDP, we reduced spending to its lowest level since 1989, while revenue as a share of GDP fell to its lowest level in a decade.
Second, the Government has also begun to embark upon the most comprehensive microeconomic reform program that Australia has seen since the early 1990s, to lift the nation's productivity growth.
In recent years productivity growth has declined sharply  -  from average annual growth of 3.3 per cent during the productivity cycle of the mid-1990s, to just 1.1 per cent in the current cycle.
The productivity slowdown reflects the long-term neglect of investing in the drivers of productivity  -  in particular the skills of our workforce.
The Government is committed to ending that neglect.
Because we know that in the long term, it is productivity growth more than any other factor that will deliver better living standards for Australians.
Over the last 40 years, productivity growth has accounted for more than 80 per cent of the improvement in the living standards of Australians. 
The Government is committed to building long-term prosperity by investing in five key platforms for future productivity growth  -  education, infrastructure, innovation, business deregulation and taxation reform.
We are progressing strongly on each of those fronts  -  through the education revolution; the 27 items on the COAG business deregulation program; the Henry Review of the taxation and welfare systems; and the recently-completed review of Australia's national innovation system.
The third pillar of the Government's economic strategy is our nation-building plan for the future.
The Government is committed to implementing the single largest infrastructure program in the history of the Commonwealth.
The Government agreed with the States and Territories at the Council of Australian Governments meeting in Perth last week, we are now bringing forward our long-term nation-building agenda.
In our first year in Government, we have committed to a $76 billion infrastructure investment program, allocating funds for road, rail, ports and high speed broadband.
We will invest $26 billion in roads and rail infrastructure through 2008-09 to the end of AusLink II.
We will invest $20 billion through the Building Australia Fund in transport and communication priorities.
And from this, we'll invest almost $5 billion in a National Broadband Network.
We will also invest $15 billion in education infrastructure, through the Education Investment Fund, trades training centres in schools, computers in our classrooms, and by investing in our universities.
We will invest $11 billion health and hospitals infrastructure, through the Health and Hospitals Fund and other programs.
Through these investments, we are building the foundations of the nation's future prosperity.
However, the Commonwealth will not be able to meet the nation's infrastructure needs alone.
State governments, their corporations, and the private sector also have critical roles to play.
In 2008-09 alone, the Queensland will spend $17 billion; NSW Government will spend $14 billion; Western Australia $8 billion and Victoria $4 billion.
According to ABN Amro, investment in public infrastructure over the next decade will be $380 billion  -  including $255 on economic infrastructure and $125 billion on social infrastructure.
In addition to the Commonwealth's financial commitment to infrastructure investment, we have established for the first time in Australian history a comprehensive policy framework for national infrastructure development.
Earlier this year we established Infrastructure Australia, the independent statutory council headed by Sir Rod Eddington that will spearhead our infrastructure reforms, making recommendations to government on both policy and specific projects.
The Minister for Infrastructure and Transport Anthony Albanese has also begun work to reform specific sectors of national infrastructure, including through national heavy vehicle regulations - and improved rail and maritime safety regulations.
Infrastructure policy is a national priority for this Government because infrastructure constraints have been holding back our economy for too long.
Infrastructure constraints are a drag on economic growth, they hold back productivity, they add to inflationary pressures, and they are part of the reason we saw ten consecutive interest rate rises under the previous Government.
Infrastructure bottlenecks will tighten in coming years unless we invest now.
By 2020 our population is expected to grow to 25 million.
By 2020 our economy is expected to grow to $1.4 trillion.
With more people and a larger economy we will face greater pressures on our roads, our rail and our port infrastructure; more pressures on our electricity network and water supplies; and more pressure on our telecommunications networks.
By 2020, the Bureau of Infrastructure, Transport, and Regional Economics estimates that without action, the cost of urban congestion will soar to $20 billion.
That is a national traffic jam of truly national proportions.
The same is true for freight  -  a 90 per cent increase in urban light commercial vehicle traffic in the 15 years to 2020.
The same is true for energy  -  the National Energy Market Management Company estimated in 2007 that we will require 1,185 megawatts in additional generation capacity by 2010-11 alone, and as much as 7,000 megawatts by 2016-17.
According to Infrastructure Partnerships Australia, the need to lower carbon emissions alone is going to require an additional investment in infrastructure in the order of $120 billion across freight, passenger transport and energy infrastructure  -  including carbon capture and storage and renewable energy investments.
The growth in demand for information and communications technology infrastructure is likely to be even more rapid.
Every time new Internet applications develop, such as YouTube, Facebook, or Secondlife, extra gigabits of traffic are added to the nation's broadband network.
Our broadband investment is critical given the state of our broadband infrastructure.
According to Washington-based independent think tank, the Information Technology and Innovation Foundation, Australia's broadband infrastructure lags behind 26 other countries including Korea, Finland and Slovak Republic.
The growing demands for infrastructure demand a vision for building 21st century road, rail and public transport networks; 21st century energy and water infrastructure, and 21st century high-speed broadband.
This investment in 21st century infrastructure is critical for our long-term economic future.
In the long-term, this will underpin productivity, competitiveness, exports and prosperity.
And it will help drive economic growth in times of global uncertainty.
The cost to the economy of inadequate infrastructure will rise if we do not act now.
According to CEDA, if we can remove infrastructure bottlenecks we can lift our economic performance.
We could potentially raise Australia's GDP by 0.8 percent per year.
We could increase exports by 1.8 per cent, increase business investment by 1.2 per cent, and lower the consumer price index by 3.2 per cent.
While economic and population growth will add to our infrastructure challenges in the future  -  we are starting from behind after more than a decade of infrastructure policy neglect under the former government:
     * Inadequate infrastructure investment;
     * Poor infrastructure planning;
     * And no infrastructure vision for the future.
But now is not the time to catalogue past mistakes in infrastructure policy.
Now is the time to act  -  to get infrastructure policy right.
It is time for the Commonwealth, States, Territories and infrastructure companies to roll up our sleeves and get on with the job of nation-building.
     * We must undertake institutional reform.
     * We must create a stable ‘national infrastructure pipe' for public and private investment.
     * We must change intergovernmental arrangements to make sure there are nationally consistent PPP guidelines.
     * We must resolve legislative overlays between Federal, State and local Government regulations.
     * We must ensure effective principles for third-party access regimes.
     * We must encourage private sector investment on the back of a major increase in public investment in the national infrastructure investment.
     * We must improve our financing strategy across the infrastructure lifecycle  -  from design and delivery to maintenance and renewal.
We must attract the best skilled labour to support our infrastructure needs.
We must address skill shortages across all stages of infrastructure development  -  design, planning, provision, construction, administration, and maintenance and renewal.
This is especially true for engineers  -  according to Engineers Australia, migrants account for more than half of the growth of new entrants to the Australian engineering profession each year.
It is expected that by 2011, 70,000 engineers will have retired but only 45,000 new graduates will have been trained.
We must also address the challenges facing individual infrastructure sectors.
We must encourage investment in energy generation capacity  -  traditional and renewable  -  in an era of carbon trading.
In water infrastructure, we will have to boost investment and improve the operation of pricing and ownership systems to ensure sustainable water use in our cities and towns.
In communications, we have to build a National Broadband Network and take ICT investment in this country to the next level.
We will need more ICT workers and have to overcome the ‘application gap' in education, health, digital commerce and entertainment  -  because we need investment in the software to match the investment in the hardware.
And, of course, in transport infrastructure policy, we also face big challenges.
One of the biggest challenges will be deciding which projects get funded now, and which ones have to wait.
The tens of billions of investment dollars we need for transport projects will simply not flow overnight.
Infrastructure Partnerships Australia recently collated a list of passenger transport projects that our major cities will need over the next 10 to 20 years.
The cost of just 17 projects was $33 billion.
Priority rail freight projects cost $13 billion.
Road project proposals that have come forward carry a price tag of $43 billion.
Tackling these challenges will require strong partnerships between the Commonwealth, the States and the business community.
I am a strong believer in PPPs because they mean the Government can ensure value for money for the taxpayer through a public interest test, while bringing specialist expertise and innovation from the private sector.
Good PPPs can deliver value for money through optimal risk transfer, management synergies, and integrated whole-of-life asset management.
They can also free up public resources to focus on other core services of government.
ABN Amro forecast recently that some $80 billion of investment in public infrastructure over the next decade will be undertaken through public private partnerships.
It is because of the important role that PPPs will play in Australia's infrastructure future that the Council of Australian Governments last week endorsed the Report on the National PPP Guidelines developed by Infrastructure Australia.
This is an example of what cooperative federalism can achieve.
To put this into perspective, for the first time jurisdictions have come to the table willing to work together to change something as fundamental as how they invest their infrastructure dollars for the benefit of the nation. 
The development of nationally consistent PPP guidelines were the first reform priority we set for Infrastructure Australia back in March.
The National PPP Guidelines Report brings together material from different jurisdictions and provides an agreed, unified national framework for the delivery of PPP projects.
It covers the key phases in the delivery of PPPs, how to achieve optimal risk allocation, and how to measure the value for money from a PPP project against traditional public sector procurement.
Infrastructure Australia has delivered on its first task  -  on time; on target.
This reform is also about changing the culture.
Because many government departments and agencies are still using the same procurement models they have had for decades.
It is not sound infrastructure policy to have a framework that leaves out PPPs.
Nor are guidelines of much use if they are not implemented by jurisdictions.
That is why, Infrastructure Australia, with COAG's endorsement, has committed to developing detailed national PPP model for agreement at the November COAG meeting.
The comprehensive PPP package will include a Practitioner's Guide, Risk Allocation and Standard Commercial Principles, Public Sector Comparator Guidance and Discount Rate Methodology Guidance.
In developing this package, Infrastructure Australia has shown the initiative to get the best policy and practical outcomes.
It demonstrates the benefit of having an independent statutory organisation such as Infrastructure Australia and the benefit of having both the public and private sectors at the table.
Infrastructure Australia is also conducting an audit of the nation's existing infrastructure.
This will be concluded by the year's end.
The next task will be to produce an Infrastructure Priority List.
The Commonwealth has also decided to bring forward an interim report on the above in order to accelerate the Government's nation-building agenda.
The National Infrastructure Priority List will be crucial to Australia's prosperity because it will identify our priorities for years into the future.
It will be the basis of determining funding allocations from the Building Australia Fund.
While no one but an elected Government can decide how to invest $20 billion of taxpayer funds, it must receive strong and independent recommendations.
To assist this, today I am pleased to announce today the next step for Infrastructure Australia's role in delivering our nation-building agenda - the National Prioritisation Methodology that will be used to assess relative need.
These guidelines outline the methodology that Infrastructure Australia will be applying to assess the infrastructure proposals it receives.
These guidelines ensure the National Infrastructure Priority List is backed up by a truly transparent process.
I believe that all interested parties  -  infrastructure companies, state and local governments and the wider community  -  should have a clear understanding of how Infrastructure Australia will determine its recommendations to government.
Key assessment criteria will include:
     * How does a project expand Australia's productivity capacity?
     * How does it build Australia's global competitive advantages?
     * How does it develop our cities or our regions?
     * How does it reduce greenhouse gas emissions?
     * How does it improve our quality of life?
Infrastructure Australia will then apply a tough, clear-eyed assessment of the intrinsic value of each project.
In short it will ask: “does it stack up?”
There must be a serious cost-benefit analysis that for the first time will monetise economic, social and environmental costs and benefits.
And in the case where costs and benefits can't be accurately monetised, these factors will be rated for the purpose of fair comparison.
Appraisals will typically have to be assessed over a thirty year timeframe.
Infrastructure Australia will also ask: what are the costs  -  the capital costs, the operating costs and the maintenance costs?
Serious ‘sensitivity tests' of the cost-benefit ratio under different circumstances add to the robustness of this appraisal methodology and will give certainty to the government's decision making:
     * What if materials cost continue to rise?
     * What if there are construction delays?
     * What if demand for the infrastructure doesn't meet expectations?
Proponents will not be able to overstate benefits and understate costs as has sometimes been the case in the past.
It is critically important that our infrastructure decisions are based on objective analysis of projects and needs.
Policy integrity is critical to good decision making.
This is the analytical rigour needed for modern nation-building.
Finally, Infrastructure Australia will use this information to compare many different projects, measures and solutions.
On this basis, it will recommend to Government which projects are the top priorities, and which projects might either belong further down the track or simply might not stack up at all.
There's no doubt that the tasks involved in shaping our nation-building agenda are very substantial.
That is why we have established Infrastructure Australia - to bring transparency, rigour and integrity to the task of infrastructure prioritisation that was sorely missed over the last decade.
It's why we are undertaking such a comprehensive analysis of Australia's infrastructure needs.
And it's why we have brought this conference together today.
The nation-building agenda for Australia's 21st century is about government taking leadership responsibility for addressing Australia's long-term future needs.
It's ultimately about more than just roads, bridges, ports, airports, energy networks, communications networks, training centres and so forth.
It's about a vision for Australia to achieve its full economic potential.
A vision for laying foundations for the prosperity and security of the generation that will come after ours.
A vision to which the Government I lead is resolutely committed.


Tonight is a great celebration of enterprise and entrepreneurs.
It's a celebration of great Australian achievement.
Of innovation, investment and a lot of hard work.
There's around 40 finalists represented here.
Each of them could tell a story of years of hard yakka.
And for each of them there are the family, friends and employees who were there too - supporting their dreams, working through nights and weekends to get an urgent job done.
Then there are the investors, the business partners and the suppliers and customers who all play critical roles in getting a business started and making it a success.
Small business is a vital part of the Australian economy  -  vital to creating jobs, exports and national prosperity.
And that's why tonight we're celebrating some of our nation's best small and medium size enterprises.
They comprise 96 per cent of all active businesses, employing nearly 4 million people and contributing around one third of GDP.
I know there's many people who romanticise about running a small business.
What I find is that those people who romanticise about small businesses usually aren't running one.
The truth is, running a small business is tough.
I know it from Therese's career and from my own.
So often there's nobody else to pick up the slack.
No-one else to do the extra paperwork, which often becomes a weekend job.
No-one else to rescue things when there's a crisis.
That's why getting a business off the ground is such a great achievement, and it's why we should publicly recognise our outstanding SMEs as we are doing tonight.
The events of recent weeks have been remarkable.
As the IMF has said this week, this is the deepest shock to the global financial system since the Great Depression.
We all know that we're going through a period of exceptional volatility.
There are tough times ahead.
But it's important that Australian businesses keep perspective.
We are not immune to the global downturn.
But the stability of our financial institutions is in good order.
Our banks remain profitable - in fact yesterday, the World Economic Forum released a report on the soundness of banks and Australia was ranked 4th out of 134 nations, ahead of 130 other nations.
Our economy is still growing.
We have a strong budget surplus as a buffer for the future, and to be used to meet the challenges of the future.
And our exports are growing strongly.
If we look to the enormous expanding market of China, the latest forecasts predict growth of 9.4 per cent in 2009.
Further, Chinese leaders have indicated a willingness to lower interest rates to stimulate their domestic economy  -  an important development for the global outlook.
India is expected to grow by 6.9 per cent in 2009.
The ASEAN economies by 5.7 per cent.
Ours is the fastest growing part of the global economy  -  by a long shot.
And that means Australian businesses still have many export opportunities.
There's one other development this week that puts a silver lining on an otherwise dark cloud.
And that's the impact of the Australian dollar's depreciation on the competitiveness of our exporters.
There's no question that while the dollar was in the 90s exporting was very, very tough.
With the dollar in the high 60s this week, the outlook has changed.
Australian exporters have a new competitive edge  -  notwithstanding the weaker growth outlook in the world economy. 
The Government I lead is strongly committed to helping Australian businesses succeed on global markets.
We are implementing a comprehensive productivity agenda to turn around the weak productivity growth of recent years.
That agenda comprises the education revolution, a nation-building infrastructure plan, business deregulation through the COAG agenda, supporting business innovation and reform of the taxation system.
This is a long-term agenda but after just ten months in office it's well underway.
We also have a long term vision to make Australia the most Asia-literate country in the western world.
That means equipping the next generation of working Australians with the language, cultural and business skills to help them seize the opportunities of the 21st century, the Asia-Pacific century.
I believe SMEs will be driving the export growth of the future.
Right now, 90 per cent of Australian exporters are either small or medium sized enterprises (SMEs).
Yet only 15 per cent of Australian SMEs are exporters, according to Austrade/Sensis research  -  suggesting we can do much more.
The Government is committed to helping businesses develop new export markets in Asia and across the world, through our outstanding trade assistance agency, Austrade.
Austrade operates innovative programs across the world and throughout our region.
For example, since the Beijing Olympics where Telstra and Austrade conducted the “Win Business Gold in China” competition, 12 Australian small businesses have successfully built new export contacts.
Tonight I'm pleased to announce a new initiative to build future exports.
Austrade and Telstra will be working together to set up programs for winners and finalists from the Telstra Business Awards and the Telstra Business Womens Awards.
Those programs will help those winners and finalists to develop their export and international business potential.
This is an important initiative.
It ensures that these Awards don't just end with tonight's ceremony or next week's magazine story.
It makes it possible for the Awards to become a stepping stone to global success.
And it makes good sense.
After all, these Awards winners attract the best young businesses in the land.
We should do all we can to help the businesses to expand onto the global stage.
In the tough times that we're facing, I want to reinforce the strength of the Government's commitment to the SME sector.
We are committed to a framework of responsible economic management to help SMEs to thrive and grow.
That is why we delivered a disciplined Budget in May, with a strong surplus as a buffer for the future.
I have mentioned already the importance of our long-term productivity agenda.
In particular, we are pursuing a deregulation agenda to create a seamless national economy.
Over the last decade the deregulation program of the Hawke and Keating Governments that opened up Australia's markets has been reversed by what the Business Council of Australia has described as the "creeping re-regulation of Australian business".
We want to turn that around, and ease the regulatory burden on Australian businesses.
Our reform program includes an unprecedented 27 areas of overlapping and inconsistent regulation across the Commonwealth, States and Territories.
We simply say this:
It's the 21st century.
We've got to stop acting like we're still in the 19th century with nine separate markets and overlapping and inconsistent business laws.
In cooperation with the States and Territories, we are dismantling the barriers to businesses operating seamlessly across State and Territory boundaries.
For example, as a result of the recent COAG meeting, businesses that operate across state boundaries will no longer need to register their business names, and pay separate fees, in each state and territory. They will have to register only once at a central, national registry.
And tradespeople who move from one state to another won't have to apply for and pay for a separate licence in each state.
This will put an end to the economics of the rail-gauge era  -  where businesses in the 21st century have still been facing the same sort of obstacles in operating across state boundaries that our grandparents faced when catching a train from one state to another.
The Government is also supporting small businesses by funding 36 Business Enterprise Centres located in suburban, rural and regional Australia, at a cost of $42 million.
These centres are providing established and start-up businesses with commercial advice, legal advice on retail and commercial tenancies, advice on compliance obligations, GST bookkeeping, finance and cash-flow management as well as advice on promotion and marketing.
We are removing the constraints on small business expansion through investment in education, skills development and by bringing forward our nation-building infrastructure plan.
We are also investing in innovation.
The recently released report of the Review of Australia's National Innovation System represented the first step in harnessing the potential of innovation and putting it work for the benefit of all Australians.
It made a number of important recommendations aimed at improving the innovative capacity of small business that the Government is considering and will respond to in the near future.
These are all practical steps to supporting the important role of SMEs in our economy.
All these measures come down to the simple aim of creating more innovative, competitive and successful Australian businesses.
Tonight, we celebrate some of the best of those businesses.
To all those businesses who have come this far as finalists tonight: Our warmest congratulations  -  and all the very best for tonight's announcements.


The global financial crisis is affecting financial markets right around the world including Australia.
More than 25 banks around the world have failed or been bailed out. Share markets around the world have suffered large losses.
And the reality is in recent days we have entered a new and damaging stage in the global financial crisis  -  with real impacts on economic growth and jobs around the world and with real impacts on economic growth and jobs here in Australia as well.
Australia is better placed than almost any other country in the world, to deal with this crisis. We have the best bank regulators in the world. Our banks' balance sheets are strong and healthy. And Australia, unlike most other countries, has a strong budget surplus.
Part of the reason we are in a better position than most is that all year we have been anticipating events and taking practical steps to prepare for them.
That's why I have announced new measures today to continue to maintain the stability of the Australian financial system into the future.
This package includes a guarantee for all bank deposits in Australian banks, credit unions and building societies.
The Government has been working for the last several months on the details of its financial claims scheme for depositors - because depositors haven't had one before.
We have decided to bring in this scheme  -  to cover all depositors and all deposits without cap  -  because I don't want to see unnecessary anxiety out there in the Australian community as ordinary Australians watch the bad news unfold on their television screens from overseas each night.
I also want to put our banking arrangements on the same footing as those which now apply in many other countries.
Another measure I have announced today is for the government to guarantee the overseas borrowing arrangements of our banks so that they can secure long term credit to continue to fund business and mortgage lending in Australia into the future.
Other governments have done this with their banks  -  and with banks in many cases which have very poor credit ratings indeed, relative to Australia's banks. And I don't want to put our banks at a disadvantage for the future.
All this is necessary to help unclog the arteries of the global financial system.
The Government is also concerned about the impact of the global financial crisis on growth and jobs for Australia.
The Government is determined to support the economy into the future by bringing forward our $76 billion nation-building agenda  -  where, for the first time, the Commonwealth will fund large scale investment in our ports, in our roads, in our rail and in high speed broadband infrastructure for the future.
The Government also remains determined to take other decisive action as necessary to support continued positive economic growth into the future  -  and to help working families, pensioners and carers deal with the impacts.
This is not just about the national economy; it is just as much about the household economy.
The truth is that what Australia is experiencing is the economic equivalent of a rolling national security crisis.
That means there is going to be a lot of rough weather ahead, and I just want to level with you.
But the Government has set an economic course for the country to see Australia through.
And we remain prepared to take whatever action, whatever action may be necessary to secure this nation's long term economic future. 
Good evening.


Good evening. 
Today I announced a $10.4 billion economic security strategy to help see Australia through the global financial crisis.
Many Australians have become concerned, anxious and even fearful as to the future.
The truth is that we are going through the worst financial crisis in our lifetime. I've described it as the economic equivalent of a national security crisis.
More than 25 banks around the world have failed, or been bailed out.
But here in Australia, we have among the best regulated banks, with the best balance sheets, in the world.
And they were rated last week as coming equal second out of 134 banking systems worldwide.
Nonetheless, as Prime Minister, I was not prepared to stand idly by while people's fears here were being fed by the stream of bad economic news from abroad.
That's why the Government took decisive action on Sunday to guarantee all depositors and all deposits in all Australian banks, building societies and credit unions, for the next three years.
My first responsibility as Prime Minister is to take whatever action is necessary to maintain the stability of Australia's financial system. 
And I will continue to exercise that responsibility.
In the last few weeks, the global financial crisis has moved into a new and dangerous stage.
And that is its effect on the real economy, on growth and jobs, around the world and here in Australia.
Growth will slow, and unemployment will rise. That's why the Government today announced this $10.4 billion Economic Security Strategy to support continued positive growth in the national economy, and to provide practical help to households as well.
This strategy is designed to help pensioners, carers and families, and first home buyers.
The Government believes in long term planning. That's why we set aside a $22 billion surplus earlier this year in the Budget, as a buffer against tough times.
Those tough times have now arrived.
And that's why we've decided to take decisive action today with this Economic Security Strategy. And we'll build on it soon with the Government's nation building agenda, to build the infrastructure Australia needs for the future.
History tells us that when the economy slows, responsible governments step in to strengthen growth. And that is what we have done by using the surplus.
As Prime Minister, it is my job to level with the Australian people. I don't intend to guild the lily. There will be tough times ahead.
But the Government remains determined to take whatever action is necessary in the future to steer the economy through this global financial crisis.
And I have absolute confidence that as a nation, we will get through these tough times together.
A video of this speech is also available.


Governments have many tasks.
But none is more important than the defence of the nation.
None is more important than ensuring the security of the nation.
The men of foresight who drafted Australia's Constitution were clear on this point.
One power they explicitly gave to the new Commonwealth Government was that of Defence.
For 107 years since Federation, Commonwealth Governments have debated, shaped, and implemented the nation's defence policy.
It is a policy that has been through many changes.
And the changes reflect the evolution of the modern independent nation that we now have.
In the pre-World War One era we saw ourselves as part of the Empire  -  with the words of Andrew Fisher still ringing in our ears down the corridors of time.
In World War One, through the work of Charles Bean in many ways, we began to see ourselves as something different, something unique.
It was the story of Gallipoli  -  so clearly and directly told by Bean  -  that helped shaped that national identity.
During the course of the Second World War our defence relationship with the United States deepened and was the harbinger of our future alliance.
The birth of the alliance reflected a new and different stage in our evolution.
Throughout the years of the Cold War, our defence policy clearly cemented our role as a US ally.
At the same time, we increasingly contributed to United Nations peacekeeping operations as we began to fulfil our role as a middle power that wanted to make a contribution to a stable global order.
As our defence policy has developed, the role of the press and the historians has been critical.
Perhaps no single individual has been more important than Charles Bean.
100 years ago  -  in 1908  -  he began his career as a journalist.
His first assignment that year was to cover the visit to Australia of the US Great White Fleet.
He did so from the flagship of the Royal Navy squadron on the Australian station, HMS Powerful.
And, after his assignment, he published a book about the experience of sailing around the South Pacific.
But his book was more than a retelling of this journey.
It also contained in it the argument for an independent Royal Australian Navy.
He was not alone in advocating the need for an Australian navy distinct from the Royal Navy.
He was joined by Deakin.
And more strongly by Fisher and the latter's demand that this be a separate command to the Imperial Fleet.
But his writing  -  even before his reporting from Gallipoli brought him to wider attention  -  set an example of what quality writing on matters of national security can do.
Early on Bean was making a contribution to the debate about the defence of the nation.
Bean set the standard here.
His was a unique contribution.
His writings about Gallipoli told, in simple, direct language, how Australian men fought at Gallipoli.
He told the story of the conflict from the point of view of the soldier.
He told the real story.
And in doing so he told Australians about themselves.
He told Australians that theirs was a nation to be proud of.
That their representatives in the horror of the trenches of Gallipoli were showing the qualities that made us great  -  determination, commitment to one another, and courage.
Bean of course then carried this reporting to the next level with the official histories.
The histories are one of the most important and seminal works in Australia's history.
They tell the story of Australians at war.
And they set a new standard for military history writing around the world.
Bean made military history about the men fighting the battles, not only about the generals setting the strategy.
It was a uniquely Australian approach.
An egalitarian military history.
Not one written for the General Staff.
In telling the history so powerfully, Bean also made the military an important part of our history.
More than any other individual, he was responsible for telling the story of ANZAC and making it a thread that weaves its way through the fabric our national character.
Bean is an example of how journalism can be a powerful influence not just on the development of policy  -  but also in shaping the national soul.
Bean, in his own way, became the narrator of the nation's story.
And in some respects, after Lawson and Paterson, the first narrator of the nation's soul.
Certainly, for me, Bean's history of Australia's involvement in the First World War together with Manning Clark's general history of Australia, had something to do with my own intellectual foundation.
And I believe fashioned some of the primal forces of Australian nationalism.
This is as true today as it was 100 years ago when Bean began his career.
Because in a democracy, it is critical that we have a well-informed national debate about defence policy and the conflicts in which we are involved. 
Our military forces today are operating at a very high tempo.
The major combat commitment we currently have is in Afghanistan.
We have almost 1100 Australian troops deployed there.
And, rightly, it attracts the interest of the media.
In recent months we have seen the debate in Australia and internationally turn to the question of whether we are making progress in Afghanistan.
In short, I believe that the answer is that we are making progress  -  even though this is slow and subject to setbacks.
I would also argue that we must make progress.
I would like to speak tonight about why we are involved in Afghanistan, what we are trying to achieve and how we are trying to achieve it.
Our commitment to Afghanistan is critical.
It is critical because it is clearly in our national interest.
First and foremost, we have seen the dangers of allowing Afghanistan to fall under the heel of the Taliban.
We have a direct security interest in strategic denial  -  preventing terrorism by denying terrorists free access to Afghanistan  -  and at the same time helping that nation to overcome 30 years of civil war to become a more stable state.
Under the Taliban, the people of Afghanistan lived in an environment of oppression and extreme poverty with the constant threat of violence.
This was a period where the basic needs of Afghans were left ignored  -  indeed people's lives went backwards  -  amid the pursuit of a violent ideology.
It was an ideology that bred hatred.
It was an ideology that brutalised women.
It was an ideology that found fellow travellers in Osama Bin Laden and Al Qaeda when they were ejected from Sudan.
The end result was the death of 3000 people in the United States in September 2001, including 10 Australians.
The end result was a global terrorism movement that roamed the world and reached into South East Asia, Europe and the rest of the world.
That threat is yet to be eradicated.
In fact, our successes in disrupting terrorism have made some complacent about the threat.
But we should not be complacent.
Al Qaeda and the terrorist groups with which it is linked continue to train.
They continue to plan.
They continue to seek opportunities to attack.
We felt the immediacy of the threat from terrorism on 12 October 2002 when 88 Australians were killed in Bali.
Those behind the attack had trained in Afghanistan.
So, a more stable Afghanistan  -  one that supports security rather than offers succour to those who seek to undermine it  -  will make for a more secure world.
This goal is something we share with the 40 nations contributing in Afghanistan.
And it is a goal endorsed by the United Nations Security Council.
It is a goal that has been authorised and is supported by the Government of Afghanistan.
Beyond the immediate and direct threat of terrorism, we have a second national interest at stake.
Working with our partners in Afghanistan, we show that we are a committed to doing our fair share to tackle international security challenges as an engaged middle power and as a real partner in our alliance with the United States.
We are a regional power with both regional and global interests.
It is right for us to play a role in meeting global security challenges.
We do not just talk about security cooperation.
We are also prepared to do our fair share of the work.
It is dangerous work and it is hard work, and our diggers' lives are on the line every day.
It is part of being a real ally of the United States.
It is part of being an active member of the United Nations.
It is part of contributing to a stable international order  -  and not just being a passive observer of events.
There are, therefore, two compelling reasons for our commitment to Afghanistan.
The first is preventing the spread of terrorism by directly taking on this threat and helping Afghanistan to rebuild itself into a more peaceful and stable state.
The second is demonstrating our capacity to play an active role in enhancing international security  -  both with our allies and with the wider international community.
If our primary objective is to prevent Afghanistan from again becoming a place where terrorist organisations can find refuge and train and plan, and export their terrorism to other nations, we need to provide the conditions for a stable government to develop.
Afghanistan needs security, good governance and economic opportunity.
This is a long-term challenge and we are in for the long haul.
There will be setbacks along the way.
Success is not guaranteed.
And we offer no blank cheque.
In the short term, the most important task is disrupting the insurgency to allow the Afghan Government space to develop.
It is difficult for any government to deal with a violent insurgency campaign, let alone a government that is new and comes to power with few structures and organs of state in place.
History shows us that counter-insurgency operations take a decade or more to win and a key part is winning the support of the population.
Our troops have shown that you can have success against an insurgency.
But disrupting the insurgency is not enough in itself.
We also need to assist the Afghan Government as it matures.
That means helping the Afghan security sector  -  the police and the armed forces  -  to develop.
We need to provide training and support.
We need to show that well trained forces under the command of a civilian government offer the best chance for stability  -  for the government and for the population.
We need to build the confidence of the people of Afghanistan that they can build a future free from the fear and intimidation of the Taliban.
And we need the support of the Government of Pakistan to ensure stability in its border regions with Afghanistan.
Stability in Afghanistan and around its borders will lead to a better future for the people of Afghanistan, for its neighbouring countries such as Pakistan and for the wider world.
Instability in Afghanistan would put further pressure on Pakistan from extremists.
But what we are trying to achieve is more than just rebuilding the security sector.
Working with the Government of Afghanistan and our international partners and other donors, we are also trying to rebuild a nation.
That means rebuilding infrastructure and institutions.
Hospitals, schools and government organs need to have both their physical structures and their knowledge bases rebuilt.
It is an enormous challenge.
It will take years.
It will require a huge investment of funds  -  we have already committed $600 million in development assistance since 2001.
The task of rebuilding a nation is still more complex than building security, infrastructure and institutions.
It is also about helping people to rebuild their lives.
Afghanistan needs training opportunities and education assistance for its people so that they and future generations do not have to rely on violence as a means to fulfil their daily needs.
This will also help to curb economic reliance on the narcotics trade.
Afghanistan needs farmers to feed its people.
It needs people with trade skills to help build and maintain infrastructure.
This will all take time to build and it will take assistance from countries like Australia.
We need to help Afghanistan build security, good governance and economic opportunity because it helps us to achieve our goals.
Australia's primary focus as part of the International Security Assistance Force coalition is the province of Oruzgan.
It is just one of Afghanistan's 34 provinces.
It is an isolated, rural and poor area of Afghanistan.
It has some of the lowest levels of primary education and some of the highest levels of infant mortality in the country.
But we have made progress.
Our military forces have had a positive impact there.
Our personnel in the province work with their Dutch and Afghan security partners to provide stability.
In recent weeks Defence has released details of successful operations to target insurgent leaders.
At the same time the Reconstruction Task Force has also worked to build schools, provide basic training in trades like carpentry and has rebuilt bridges and irrigation systems.
Oruzgan Province also demonstrates the importance of having a coherent military and civilian strategy  -  something that Australia has pushed for in discussions with our NATO partners.
It is not a matter of either or.
Nor is it a matter of one first and then the other.
The civilian and the military are two parts of one strategy.
They cannot be separated.
Either without the other is unsustainable.
This brings some real challenges when dealing with a province like Oruzgan.
It is not that civilian structures have to be rebuilt.
They have to be established.
And they have to be established in a way that recognises and complements existing traditional structures.
Complex power relationships exist in Oruzgan between villages, tribal groups and other interest groups.
All have a stake in the status quo.
The challenge is to work with these groups where possible to build a more stable environment.
To get a long-term solution to Afghanistan's internal tension (both in Oruzgan province and nationwide), there will need to be a carefully integrated civilian, political and military strategy.
The Government of Afghanistan has to win over its opponents and show them that a peaceful future is not only possible but is far preferable to a future of ongoing violent conflict.
As it works to overcome the challenges it faces, the Government of Afghanistan will need our support.
We need to work closely with our partners to achieve the goal we all seek.
Now that Australia has a voice in the NATO councils that set the strategy for the task in Afghanistan we are better placed to make a more meaningful contribution.
The NATO Summit in April in Bucharest which I attended helped to strengthen international commitment.
We welcomed in particular announcements of increased troop commitments by France, Germany, the United Kingdom and the United States.
We welcomed the United Nations' commitment to increasing its effort and presence in Afghanistan.
And we welcomed agreement on a process to assess progress in Afghanistan.
Given the investment we are making, we need robust analysis of progress.
The International Support Conference for Afghanistan held in June sustained the momentum of the NATO Summit.
At the Conference, the international community pledged 20 billion dollars of support and the Afghan Government launched its own national development strategy.
Our Afghanistan policy is a comprehensive one.
We have a strong military commitment  -  one that includes training and mentoring as key roles.
We have a broad development assistance program  -  one that helps to build skills and soft and hard infrastructure.
But the challenges that remain are enormous.
And the resources that are needed are significant.
But Australia remains committed.
We will subject our commitment to annual review against the mission we have set for ourselves.
Against the integrated civilian and military strategy agreed with NATO.
And against the application of those strategic objectives to our particular charge in Oruzgan province.
Where once again I underline publicly the appreciation for the work being done on the ground by our troops and our diplomats in Afghanistan.
Still in harm's way.
All doing their work with absolute professionalism  -  in the great tradition of those who wore the uniform of Australia before them.
There will be more casualties.
This is a dangerous theatre of operations.
But the mission is important for Australia. 
100 years ago C.E.W. Bean became a journalist.
In 1914 he became Australia's first official war correspondent.
And, in the trenches at Gallipoli where he was only overlooked for the Military Cross because he was a civilian, he showed a great dedication to the people around him.
And a great dedication to the truth.
It is a remarkable achievement that Bean was at Gallipoli from the very first day  -  and as a result of a wound he sustained during the campaign, he carried a reminder around with him for the rest of his life  -  a bullet in the leg.
It is a remarkable achievement that he followed the Australians to every one of the major battles they were in on the Western Front.
He was determined that the story of the Australian soldiers be told to the Australian people.
And at the end of that conflict  -  and over the next 23 years  -  he produced an official war history unlike anything the world had ever seen.
Of course, Bean's efforts also led to the establishment of this great Australian War Memorial.
This great temple to our great Australian war dead.
This temple to the 100,000 names inscribed on its walls.
A temple to the million and more who have worn the uniform of Australia.
Bean's epitaph lies equally in the words of his history and in the stories of this building.
In both, Bean gave the nation its memory.
And in doing so, inspires the nation in the crafting of its future.
C.E.W. Bean  -  a great Australian who will transcend the ages.


I am delighted to join you this evening as we recognise and promote scientific excellence:
     * excellence in scientific research, and
     * excellence in teaching science and inspiring the next generation of Australian scientists.
Science and innovation underpin the continued improvements in living standards that we in the modern world take for granted.
Scientific discovery and application is the reason why we now live longer and healthier lives, why we can communicate globally at almost zero cost and retrieve information from any part of the world through the internet.
Our lives continue to be transformed by the new frontiers in science.
As our world continues to change rapidly, and the global economy is transformed by the rise of China and India, science is going to become more critically important to our future.
As an economy, Australia can't compete against the large emerging economies on price alone.
We will never have the scale or the low labour costs that will make us cheaper than those nations.
But we can compete through education, innovation and excellence.
That is why science plays such an important role in the Government's vision for Australia's future  -  for a stronger economy, and for competing successfully in the global economy of the 21st century.
Science is also critical to tackling the challenges of the future:
     * putting Australia in front in clean green energy and other climate change technologies;
     * creating the fulfilling, high skill jobs of the future;
     * achieving breakthroughs in medical research that can help the management and cure of chronic diseases like diabetes, cancer and dementia;
     * ensuring a strong future for our rural industries and communities, as they face water shortages yet growing world food demand.
Australia needs a strong base of science teaching and scientific research  -  in our schools, universities, government agencies, and our research organisations.
That means in particular that more must be done to retain our best and brightest scientists and researchers within Australia  -  or giving them good reasons to come home.
Australia has a strong record of scientific achievement.
But we can still do better.
Consider the facts:
     * A decade ago Australia was ranked 16th out of 28 countries for the strength of our research collaboration between industry and universities. The most recent evaluation in 2004 saw Australia's position collapse to being the bottom of the table.
     * Australia has only 8 PhDs per thousand people in the workforce, compared to 11 per thousand in the United States, 20 per thousand in Germany, and 28 per thousand in Switzerland.
I believe we can turn this around.
Not overnight.
Not in one Budget.
Not even in the life of one Parliament.
But with a long term vision for science policy, we can capture the creativity and ingenuity of our people and build a more prosperous future for the country.
Even now, we produce 3 per cent of the world's research papers with just 0.3 per cent of the world's population.
In a world where most scientific discovery and application will occur offshore, it makes sense that a major part of our science strategy is to build stronger ties to the international science community.
That has been a priority for the Government in our first year in office.
Australia has established the Australia-China Joint Coordination Group on Clean Coal Technology.
Australia has become the first associate member of the European Molecular Biology Laboratory, a multinational facility dedicated to basic research.
And in August, the New Zealand government agreed to support and campaign for Australia's bid to host the $2 billion square-kilometre array radio telescope.
This iconic project won't just revolutionise our understanding of the universe  -  it would also have a transforming impact on scientific endeavour here in Australia.
Winning this project, which is being jointly developed by researchers in 19 nations, would have an enormously beneficial impact on Australian science.
The Australian Government has committed over $100 million to this initiative.
If Australia is successful, we stand to benefit from a potential multi-billion dollar investment.
This Government believes science has an important role to play in informing the policy making process.
I strongly believe in evidence-based policy.
That includes greater use of scientific evidence in the process of making and evaluating policy.
The Chief Scientist has an important role in providing a scientific input into the policy process, and that is one reason why the Government has upgraded the position of Australia's Chief Scientist to a full-time role.
I am delighted that Professor Penny Sackett, an outstanding astronomer, will shortly commenceher five year appointment to this role as the leader of the nation's scientific community.
Professor Sackett is a strong advocate for the scientific community and she will play a key role in promoting science across the country  -  from classrooms to boardrooms, and across the entire nation.
Professor Sackett's valued advice is complemented by the other members of the Prime Minister's Science, Engineering and Innovation Council, which meets twice per year.
The Council gives me the opportunity to hear from scientists directly, on matters as diverse as the regional impacts of climate change, water supplies in our cities, Indigenous healthcare, and new technologies.
When we met last week, we focused on the future of the National Innovation System.
The Review of the National Innovation System, conducted by Professor Terry Cutler, provides policy recommendations for the Government across science, research and innovation.
The Government is reviewing those recommendations and will be responding to the report with a White Paper on innovation policy in the near future.
The Government has already moved to address the urgent priorities facing the science sector.
The first is in teaching.
Australia needs more people studying maths and science.
We need more of those graduates to go back into our school classrooms and teach the next generation of scientists.
That is why our Government is investing $626 million in financial incentives to do just that.
From 1 January next year, new maths and science students will see their HECS fees slashed from over $7,400 to less than $4,200.
The message that sends to students is simple: “We want you to study maths and science, and we'll back you for making that choice.”
We're also cutting HECS for maths and science graduates who go into related occupations like teaching these subjects in secondary school or becoming primary school teachers.
Because teaching the next generation is a wonderful use of scientific talent.
The Government is also committed to strengthening scientific research.
     * We are investing $209 million to double the number of postgraduate scholarships to higher degree research students.
     * We are investing $326 million to create 1,000 mid-career Future Fellowships.
     * And we are investing $239 million for our new Laureate Fellowships program.
Together, these three initiatives provide a boost across the research spectrum  -  higher degree, mid-career and peak of career researchers.
Tonight is an opportunity to celebrate the achievements of those who have dedicated their lives to scientific endeavour.
The achievements of each of tonight's winners are truly world-class.
There are fewer greater contributions a person can make to our society than dedicating themselves to breakthroughs in human knowledge and to passing scientific understanding on to the next generation.
So tonight, I join you in applauding these achievers for their dedication and excellence.
And I look forward to our nation producing many more such examples of excellence in coming years. 


Thanks very much.
Treasurer, Assistant Finance Minister, Craig Emerson the Minister for Small Business and Heather and all those from the Ai Group, and it's good to be in this gathering today, an important stage in this country's economic history, and an important stage in this country's economic future.
It's been an interesting week, this week. In the space of five days the Australian Government has guaranteed all deposits and all depositors in Australian banks, building societies and credit unions.
The Australian Government has provided a guarantee to the wholesale funding arrangements for Australia's banks until market conditions stabilise.
The Australian Government has increased to $8 billion its activities through the Australian Office of Financial Management and the purchase of residential mortgage backed securities.
And the Australian Government has announced a $10.4 billion Economic Security Strategy to assist in underpin positive economic growth into the future.
That's been the last five days.
This is an intense period of government effort and it will be intense for a long period to come.
My message to you today is along these lines. First, that throughout this year, the government has been planning ahead. Planning ahead  mindful of unfolding threats, mindful of unfolding challenges and acting ahead of the curve.
The second is this, the government in the period ahead remains determined, absolutely determined, to take whatever action is necessary to continue to underpin economic growth and to continue to maintain the stability of the Australian financial system.
And the third message is this, that government, business, the unions, the community  -  we're all in this together. And together, we're going to come through this thing. We're going to come through this thing in good shape.
Government action in the year so far. Earlier this year, not long after the government was elected, the Treasurer and I sat down with the Treasury and with others and it became clear to us that we faced an uncertain year ahead.
This year was reinforced by my discussions in the United States and United Kingdom and in Brussels in March/April, reinforced by the Treasurer's discussions with his counterparts in many foreign capitals in that time period as well. Reinforced by recent meetings with leaders, when I was recently at the United Nations General Assembly. And reinforced again most recently in the week just past by the Treasurer's meetings in Washington as part of the International Monetary Fund and the G20.
All through this year, we've been conscious of these unfolding economic circumstances. Today it's unnecessary to go to the question of the causes of what has happened. Today it's more important to explain what has been done and what we still intend to do.
During the course of this year the government has acted in absolute close coordination with our financial and economic regulators. Can I say, in this having spoken now to many foreign heads of government, we are profoundly well served by our regulators. The Australian Prudential Regulatory Authority, the Reserve Bank of Australia, ASIC and the Treasury.
In very difficult and virtually unprecedented circumstances they have performed a first class job. We are well served by them.
The government has worked in close coordination with them throughout the year. Often, in fact invariably, below the radar, as is often best the case.
Throughout this year, and invariably without much fanfare, the Reserve Bank of Australia has injected more and more liquidity into markets.
Throughout this year, measures have been taken of a legislative and regulatory nature when most particular action was required at that time, but to make sure that we had a capacity to act when action was necessary.
The Treasurer back in May introduced legislative authority for Australia to extend its activities in the Commonwealth Government securities market. Extending our activities with the bond market to the quantum of $25 billion, releasing $5 billion in the shorter term.
Furthermore the Treasurer introduced legislation to make it possible for the Australian Office of Financial Management to engage in the purchase of residential mortgage backed securities. Again, ahead of the curve.
Again, earlier this year the government foreshadowed legislation for a financial claims scheme as it relates to the long term security of depositors. Again, ahead of the curve.
The point in raising these things is to say that your regulators have been hard at work, they've been ahead of the game providing us with timely advice about when it's been necessary to act and the government has so acted.
This brings us to the dramatic decisions of recent days, those announced by myself on Sunday and through close collaboration again with the regulators and the Treasurer on the phone from Washington, and also with the other members of the strategic policy and budget committee of the Cabinet.
The judgment we took, based on the advice of the regulators, is that notwithstanding the fact that Australia's mainstream banks are in absolute first class working order, well regulated, strong balance sheets, and across the world with 20 AA rated banks our four, our top four, being among those 20. There was a danger that with the provision of foreign government guarantees for wholesale term funding on markets, on capital constrained markets, that our banks despite their (inaudible) ratings, were going to be compromised. That is, that those banks operating in foreign jurisdictions with less robust balance sheets, with then the new underpinning of government guarantees in the marketplace, would be in a more competitive position than our banks in order to secure term funding for the future.
This is not an abstract debate about finance policy; it's a real debate about future lines of credit into the Australian economy. It's a real debate about how, in fact, you provide secure lines of credit into the Australian economy for the purposes just described before by Heather in her presentation. Making sure there's enough credit for loans to businesses out there engaged in real economic activity and in the real economy.
And that certainly was foremost in the government's mind when it took the unprecedented step of providing that guarantee.
Secondly, because other foreign governments had acted, and a number of other governments prospectively were going to act, the guarantee in relation to all deposits, all depositors, for all banks and building societies and credit unions, was a necessary second step.
Necessary because we could not say and look squarely in the eye the citizens of Australia and say that guarantees should be extended to banks for elements of their commercial operations and not provide a guarantee for working Australians concerned about their deposits long term.
Again, as the bad news filtered its way through the television screens over time, concerns were beginning to emerge in Australia about this deluge of bad news from abroad that someone there'd be some concern about the security of our financial institutions here at home. And again, the government was determined to act ahead of the curve.  And we did so.
The second area which has confronted us in recent weeks has been the flow through impact of these extraordinary convulsions on financial markets through credit markets, through stock markets, onto the real economy. And again, it has been necessary to be ahead of the curve.
If you look at the emerging economic data from around the world in the industrial economies in recent months, the downward revisions in growth projections across the OECD and beyond have been significant.
The world economic outlook from the document that was produced by the IMF only a couple of weeks ago indicated clearly that  growth projections in the global economy were down one per cent for the calendar year ahead, '09, for the industrial economies down one per cent for calendar '09, and for industrial economies at best bumping along at zero and something worse than that as well.
And the quotation from the IMF managing director referred to by Heather before is a steely quotation  -  it focuses the mind. That is, for the major economies around the world that they are either in recession or on the cusp of recession. That's that data from which we have been presented.
That data was presented by the IMF collating the data from across member economies prior to the extraordinary convulsions that we saw in the last two to three weeks in the United States.
That series of events, from the bail out of a range of name institutions through to the troubled passage of the measures put forward by the Bush Administration through the United States Congress and through to subsequent actions from other governments including in Europe.
The conclusion therefore that the Australian Government reached in close consultation with our advisers was that given that growth was being revised downwards across the developed and developing economies around the world, and that those most recent downwards revisions occurred prior to the recent dramatic events in the United States. That the only prudent and responsible course of action looking forward was to engage in a substantial stimulus package for the economy.
We stand by that decision, it is the right decision - it is absolutely the right decision for the times that we confront.
When you're confronted with these sorts of challenges to the real economy and how they flow through to real growth and real jobs in Australia, the three dictums which apply are as follows when it comes to fiscal policy  -  go hard, go early and go to households. And we've done so. Some were surprised by the dimensions of the package which we released the other day, the Economic Security Strategy, we stand by that resolutely as the appropriate response for the circumstances that we now confront.
And the point I make to you today, parallel to what I said earlier on, is that we remain equally determined to take resolute action in the future as is necessary to continue to support economic growth in the economy.
Of course, that Economic Security Strategy which we announced on Tuesday is built on the back of the government again planning ahead.
In May this year when the Treasurer brought down his first Budget, we set aside a substantial government Budget surplus for the purposes of providing a buffer for us for the future. A buffer for Australia for the future. A buffer against tough times. A Budget framed against the discussions that both the treasurer and I have had around the world prior to the framing of the Budget.  I'm glad that we did so.  Those tough times have come. And we're now drawing, using and deploying the financial resources available to the government through that surplus.
Of course, the other thing is that as of 1 July this year the Government, also through the Budget, legislated going forward a $55 billion plus package of family support measures anchored in a $44 billion plus tax cut agenda, the first of which flowed through from the 1st of July against some of the counsel of some of the commentariat at the time. I'm glad we took that decision as well.
But also reinforced by other measures designed to assist the family budget, including the increase to the childcare tax rebate. 
So from July, we had those stimulus measures flowing into the economy. By setting aside the surplus through careful preparation of the Budget, the capacity to act with the economic stimulus package that we announced on Tuesday of $10.4 billion, activity which will flow into the economy over the period ahead, and I'll come to its detail in a minute.
Then, moving forward again, come December, the Government will bring forward its nation building agenda, its infrastructure agenda. And you'll see announcements flowing from that from early next year. 
The Government unapologetically is a Government of nation building. We've said that before the election, we set aside funds for that purpose, again through our Budget preparations in May this year. And the time has come again to deploy those resources, building infrastructure. Not necessary just now, but necessary importantly for the long term productivity of the economy as well.
And then from 1 July next year the next round of tax cuts flow as well. What we've sought to do therefore through this integrated set of measures is to provide continued injections into the economy. Tax cut based activity flowing through from 1 July. Furthermore, on top of that, the economic security strategy which I've just referred to, the $10.4 billion stimulus package announced on Tuesday. And on top of that again, what comes in December, the nation building agenda, the first instalment of which will be announced at that time. And flowing through again into the first round of tax cuts which flow from the 1st of July next year.
That's on the fiscal policy front.
On monetary policy you've seen the dramatic action taken recently by the Reserve Bank of Australia in its decision to reduce rates by 100 basis points. If you read carefully the statement of the Reserve Bank Governor issued at the time, he refers quite explicitly to a material change in our economic circumstances. That's why he acted, and that's why we have acted. Fiscal and monetary policy working together against the challenges that we now face.
On the package that we just announced on various measures, you're familiar with those which flow directly to households, those which flow directly to pensioners. I draw particular emphasis on those which flow through to the housing sector. We've been mindful of the construction of the growth drivers in the economy. We've been mindful of the role of consumption, private consumption, and we've been mindful of the role of private dwelling investment as a big driver of growth in the economy and its flow on effects across the economy.  And that's why when it came to private dwelling investment that we took the measures that we did, unprecedented, to double the first home owners grant from $7,000 to $14,000  -  but then on top of that, to triple the first home owners grant if the first home owner in question proceeds to invest and buy in a newly built home.
Now, this has been done with the clear objective, which is to stimulate the housing sector. As for the measures done, they've been taken to stimulate consumption.
The credit related measures I referred to before have a weather eye plainly on the challenges which business face in terms of private fixed capital investment into the future as well.
And, when it comes to the infrastructure agenda, that goes to the other main driver of economic growth, namely what happens through public expenditure in public investment.
The purpose of my running through all these measures is to indicate this has been planned, in terms of Budget preparedness, well in advance. It has been executed in a systematic way for the future. And, when it comes to further measures which may be necessary in terms of fiscal policy and the future underpinnings of economic growth, the government remains determined to act as is necessary.
There is a third area where the government has sought to be ahead of the pace, ahead of the curve, and planning ahead. And that is I believe the other part of the competence equation.
I've spoken so far about the necessary measures which have been taken in ensuring the continued stability of the Australian financial system. I've spoken about the measures we've taken so far in terms of proper investment into the real economy through the fiscal stimulus measures that I've just referred to, and those which are coming down the track. But there is a third part of the real economy, real financial markets, and confidence equation as well. And that is what the governments of the world choose to do in terms of their global response through regulation to the overall challenge of the global financial crisis.
I believe what the markets of the world have been saying to the governments of the world in recent times is collectively ‘will you please get your acts together'.
A stimulus package here, a regulatory initiative there, a liquidity measure over here, the economies A, B and C or X, Y and Z  -  that's terrific, tick the box, wonderful. But I think the markets of the world are saying this in what is a definition in global financial crisis mandates an integrated global regulatory response and a global policy response.
Those are the the debates in which I've been deeply engaged, and which the Treasurer has been deeply engaged with his Finance Minister counterparts in the G20 and in the IMF most recently.
What I'll be releasing later today is a proposal which I'll be putting to heads of government across the G20 about how we, the governments of the world, agree on a long term reform package going to the future of the global financial system.
The Treasurer will attend a meeting of the G20 Finance Ministers in November. It's important that we in Australia build political consensus around the world to ensure that this is not a meeting, that it actually produces a considered and reasoned outcome for the future.
The Australia proposal, and it is consistent with the proposal that I advanced recently in an address to the UN General Assembly  -  there are five action points. The first is that systemically important financial institutions should be licenced to operate in major economies only under the condition that they make full disclosure and analysis of balance sheet and off balance sheet exposures.
Systemically important financial institutions are not just commercial banks, but can include investment banks, insurance companies, hedge funds and financial clearing houses.
Which institutions are systemically important will vary by one country over time. The central bank in each country should have responsibility for financial systemic stability. This should be reflected in the agreed best practice code for financial regulation and monitored and assessed by the International Monetary Fund, through its FSAP and surveillance activities.
Action 2, we need to ensure that banks, other financial institutions, as some of the additional earnings that they make in good times, using predictable rules to build up capital as a buffer for the bad times. Supervisory frameworks need to be counter-cyclical not pro-cyclical.
The Basel rules need to be changed to deal with this.
Action 3, financial institutions need to have clear internal incentives to promote financial stability. Regulators should set high capital requirements for financial firms that have executive remuneration packages that reward short term returns or excessive risk taking. Again, the Basel rules need to be changed to deal with this.
Action 4, supervisory systems must be compatible with financial stability. We need to make sure accounting rules used to evaluate risk take a more medium term perspective and do not encourage institutions to think that risk is low just because current asset prices are high, or recent asset price volatility has been has been low. Again the Basel rules need to be changed to address this.
And action 5, the International Monetary Fund must be given a strengthened mandate for prudential analysis. International Monetary Fund and the Financial Stability Forum, in which Australia is an active member, should provide early warning of vulnerabilities and provide advice and remedial policies. These prudential reports by the IMF should form the basis of active engagement with the G20 to shape understanding and action on global risk and system stability.
I will be corresponding with heads of government counterparts across the G20 in the next 24 hours in support of that proposal and in anticipation of the G20 Finance Ministers meeting which will be held in Brazil next month, which the Treasurer will be attending.
Also, there'll be upcoming meetings of heads of government at APEC and heads of government meetings in the East Asia Summit as well. It will be important to deploy political momentum from those meetings in support of an integrated global reform agenda.
Again, the government has sought to be ahead of the curve. The government has sought to be in the business of planning ahead and through these proposals, in concert with some positive proposals coming out of the British government and other governments in recent times, we believe that we can make real progress. More importantly, we must achieve this outcome because the stability of the global financial system underpins all the other discussions which will be alive around this table today.
To conclude, for the future, actions by government planning ahead is just one part of the equation. Planning ahead on needs for maintaining the stability of the Australian financial system, as I've said before, we will act as necessary.
Similarly, we will act as is necessary for the future stimulation of the Australia economy. And we will act as is necessary in concert with other governments in bringing about a consistent regulatory regime for the future, because until that is finally got right I believe we are going to face continuing uncertainties on global financial markets.
But that is what governments can do. The other part of the equation is what we do with business. And part of the reason we're here today with you is to hear what business has to say firsthand about their own experiences. It's important that we maintain a continuing dialogue with business and with the general community while this global financial crisis works through Australia's economy.
This is going to be a tough time, it's going to be a hard time, and it will require from time to time unprecedented measures and unprecedented actions. We wish to do so collaboratively and in a consultative fashion with business. And that's part of the reason that we're here today.
You are part and parcel of the agenda of maintaining confidence in Australia. Government is part and parcel of the agenda in maintaining confidence in Australia. Consumers are part and parcel of the agenda in maintaining confidence in Australia. We're all part of that overriding economic mission now.
I was challenged before by Heather and by others as to what happens with the rest of the government's continuing economic policy agenda.
My attitude to that is the productivity agenda  -  full steam ahead. Australia will come through this. We can't use this as an excuse to push to one side necessary long term productivity reforms aimed at producing higher a productivity force outcome in the overall Australian economy.
So our investment in education, skills and training will continue apace. Our investment in infrastructure will continue apace. Our investment of policy and political energy in the national business deregulation agenda through the Council of Australian Governments will continue apace. And there are currently 27 separate items of national business deregulation which are up for decision by COAG in the period ahead.
Similarly, I was challenged about the continuation of the government's approach to climate change and important and critical technologies like carbon capture and storage. These problems do not just disappear; they are with us for the future. They need to be acted on, systematically, sensibly, rationally; on a continuing basis and the government will continue to do that. As reflected recently by the government's announcement of its intention to establish a global carbon capture and storage institute. The core reason is our technology is good, our economic need is great because we are the world's largest coal exporting economy, and the rest of the world needs us to take the lead, and we intend to do so.
Finally, this is as much about what we do and the concrete actions we take as it is about the spirit of the nation as well. You know, people can get gloomy and down in the mouth and there is a lot to be gloomy and down in the mouth about if you watch the news all the time. That's true. But you know something, part of leadership, nationally and in corporations and in the general community, lies in pointing realistically to the challenges and threats we face, but equally realistically to the strengths that we have as an economy and as the community.
And I look to the spirit of the Australian nation, they're not a bunch of panic merchants, they're a bunch of very practical people who believe passionately in the future of the country.
I believe with the policy settings we have, we the policy actions we've taken and with the active participation of you, the men and women of Australian business, and with the broader community, we'll see Australia through in a very strong shape indeed.
Thank you.


The extraordinary thing is the number  -  two and a half million people. That's an army of care. That's an army of concern. That's an army of love out there.
And it's quite humbling for those of us who are engaged in paid political life to reflect on that, and what I'll say from the very beginning is thank-you. It's a truly remarkable thing. Thank-you.
The extraordinary part of the story of carers is the number, the intensity and the personal dimensions of each story. If you look up the side of this room here: “I worry about the future”  -  Sally. “I want to make a difference” - Aaron. I like Aaron's story. He has been looking after his mum since he was 11. We have just heard of course from Lois and the other stories along the side of the wall as well. “I don't finish at 5” and “I sometimes feel invisible”.
The great thing about what you are doing here is giving a truly personal dimension to what is an extraordinary national story. The story of carers in our country is a narrative about Australia itself, it's a narrative also about those who provide that care individually and each story is different.
So whether it's what is contained in this 2020 report, in the book which Jenny launched before, or in the stories which go through this extraordinary campaign as we saw reflected just now in the DVD, this is all part of a further wake-up call to the nation about what is happening out there in so many families.
The other thing about being a carer is a very sober and personal reflection. At some stage in our life, all of our lives, we will be receiving care. At some stage of our life we will probably all be giving care in one form or another. It's a very humanising reflection to realise that this is an experience, if not ours at the moment, it will be soon in one form or another.
And the dimensions of it, not just in providing for aged parents, but the sheer happenstance of not knowing when you are going to find yourself in a situation where through a young child who is born with an abnormality, with a disability or through an extraordinary accident and suddenly your world is turned on its head.
So this is not just a reflection of good national policy, not just a reflection of what is very good about being Australian, it is also a reflection I think on each of our personal journeys in life and again I thank Carers Australia for introducing us to that today.
Last year, as Jenny indicated before, we began examining the cost of living pressures faced by pensioners through an inquiry we recommended to the Australian Parliament. In this year's Budget the Government delivered $7.5 billion to deliver increased financial security to seniors, carers and disability support pensioners.
The Budget also delivered an $822 million package for carers which included:
     * $293 million for carers of children with a disability or severe medical condition in response to the recommendations of the report ‘Carer Payment (Child): A new approach'
     * Secondly $428 million for bonus payments for carers, and
     * And thirdly $100 million for supported accommodation facilities for people with disability.
And Jenny was right, the impact which that lady had on us as a Government at a meeting of community cabinet in Penrith where she simply detailed her story, about what does she do as the loving mother of a 26-year-old boy.
Hearing this  -  “I worry about the future”, and that is, what happens when she can no longer provide that care. Which led to an active discussion in the Government about simply the adequacy of the provision of effective supported accommodation for those who have had care provided to them by their parents, but for whom that prospect becomes more difficult as the years roll by.
The Government has also embarked on a focused examination of the pension system through the Harmer Review, to reform that system to ensure it delivers for carers and other pensioners over the long term.
The Government's commitment to seniors, to carers and to people with a disability is deeply held. Now for us, this is simply a matter of fairness and getting it right. And fairness we believe is part of the Australian DNA, it is also part of this Government's DNA and we want to get it right and get it right for the long term.
From 8 December also, almost 130,000 Carer Payment recipients and 714,000 Disability Support Pensioners will receive lump sum payments of $1,400 for singles and $2,100 for couples.
This is a recognition of the strong view expressed to Dr Harmer's review that the current single pension rate which has remained just 60 per cent of the combined couple rate over the last 12 years is just not enough.
In the nine months between now and when we intend long term pension reform to take effect, these payments provide the equivalent of an additional $35 for single pensioners and $26 for each member of a couple pensioner household.
We will also provide a one-off payment of $1,000 for more than 400,000 Australians who receive carer allowance in recognition of the tireless support they provide for children and adults who are ill or who have a disability.
This means that in the 12 months that will be our first year in office, we have invested an additional $12.3 billion in assistance for pensioners, seniors and carers.
In the 12 months that we have been in office we have established a process to achieve long term pension reform  -  to deliver economic security for carers and the people for whom they care. This is the right thing for Australia to do.
Supporting carers in our community goes beyond providing financial security.
That is why the government has asked the House Standing Committee on Family, Community, Housing and Youth to conduct its own examination into the provision of better support for carers.
This cross-party review, led by Annette Ellis, the Member for Canberra, who is with us today, is looking at how we better recognise the needs of carers and the necessary support for them. I commend Annette and the committee members for their work.
I am delighted this morning to be presented with the report of the Carers' Virtual 2020 project.
This project provided an opportunity for carers from all over Australia to provide their views and experiences on being a carer. This provides the personal stories which we have spoken of already.
I look forward very much to reading the report and listening to carers' views during this Carers Week. The Government recognises that carers make enormous personal sacrifices. We know that caring responsibilities can impact on a carer's capacity to participate in the community at large, both socially and economically, and individually. We recognise also that the burden of care can be especially heavy on young carers and women.
Around five per cent of Australians under the age of 25  -  that is 350,000 young people  -  provide care to another person. That is an extraordinary figure, 350,000 people under 25 acting as carers. Of these, more than 20,000 are the primary care giver.
More than 170,000 young carers are under the age of 18 and, among these, the average age is 12 to 13, another extraordinary figure. Each day, young carers face constant challenges trying to juggle their study, their work and their caring responsibilities.
At a time when most young people are out there enjoying life and a new independence, these young carers, I would call them young Australian heroes, are out there shouldering the responsibilities of adults.
That can mean restricted opportunities and increased stress compared with the lives of other kids.
In particular, their capacity to participate in secondary and tertiary education may be limited because of their caring role, which, in turn, limits their career options and their employment opportunities and puts them at risk of some long term disadvantage.
Earlier this year, the Government provided more than $7 million to the Young Carers' Program to enable it to continue providing respite, general support and information services to young carers.
This will also give young carers who are at risk of not completing secondary education because of their caring responsibilities much-needed access to education, training and recreational activities.
The Government has also provided $20 million over three years in respite support for carers of young people with severe disabilities.
The Government is committed to engaging and consulting with young carers so that they can provide us with advice on how to give them better support.
Young carers will have an opportunity to influence future government policy and give the government their views on future policy direction when they meet at a national forum on 26 and 27 November this year.
Another aspect of caring that has been highlighted by the NATSEM-Commonwealth Bank research is that primary carers are most often women. In 2003, almost 55 per cent of carers were women, with the number of primary carers who are women likely to increase to 70 per cent by 2013. This is a huge responsibility.
The NATSEM-Commonwealth Bank report notes that “women carers pay a high price in terms of their health and financial well-being for taking on a primary carer role.” Carers suffer greater ill health, reduced earnings and less financial security.
The lessons in this are threefold:
     * First, we must provide greater financial support and assist carers to build retirement income.
     * Second, we must assist carers to participate in the paid workforce.
     * And third, we must work harder to help carers themselves stay in good health.
    Making progress for carers starts with achieving a better understanding of our nation's carers and the work they do, and the help they need and the support they deserve. And that is the purpose of this Carers Week.
If I could say thank-you to Carers Australia for the extraordinary work that you do. This is a labour of love. It takes a lot of effort, far beyond a normal working day.
I have learnt from both Jenny and from Justine in the time that we have been in Government, the extraordinary efforts put in by your association to effectively argue the case for carers, I think is worthy of real commendation. Put your hands together for them.
But beyond that in this Carers Week if I as Prime Minister of Australia could say this one thing: the nation thanks the army of carers, of unpaid carers, the 2.5 million carers who make this country continue to tick.
You are heroes, each and every one of you. The country recognises your achievement and through the forms that we have begun and those which we have yet to conclude, we intend to honour you.


In the midst of a global financial crisis, this is an important gathering.
We're here today because we, as the business community, we as a nation must work together to protect the nation's economic future.
Today's gathering brings together economic decision makers in the government and the commercial acumen that each of you represent, from the business community.
It's an opportunity for us to discuss economic conditions in the small business sector and how policies can help address the challenges that we face.
It follows a meeting that the Treasurer and I and the Small Business Minister Craig Emerson had with the business community in Sydney last Friday.
As many of you will be aware from your own experiences, our country faces difficult economic circumstances.
What began as a sub-prime crisis in the United States mortgage market has quickly become a global economic problem spreading to Europe, spreading to Asia, spreading from financial markets, spreading now to the real economy.
Australia is a robust economy  -  but we are not immune from what happens in the rest of the world.
That is why our government has been determined to take decisive action to protect our long term economic prosperity.
We've acted to maintain the stability of the financial system with a government guarantee for deposits.
We've acted to support continued bank lending to business by providing a government guarantee to the term wholesale funding arrangements of the banks.
We've acted to stimulate the economy with a $10.4 billion Economic Security Strategy.
These three actions are unprecedented in the history of the Commonwealth.
We are in the midst of unprecedented times.
All three of these actions have been necessary to maintain the stability of the Australian financial system and to maintain positive economic growth.
All three of these measures have been necessary to maintain confidence in the financial system and in the economy.
And as I said at the time with each of these measures and when they were announced, the Government stands ready to take whatever action, whatever action is necessary in the future to continue to maintain the stability of the financial system and to continue to maintain positive growth in the economy.
The truth is that the international financial system and the international economy are travelling through virtually unprecedented times.
And the truth therefore is that the Australian economy and the Australian financial system are travelling through uncharted waters. And there will be rough waters ahead for us to negotiate. Challenges will continue to arise that need to be dealt with.
And as the Government we will work through each of these systematically, calmly and methodically. Together with our financial and economic regulators we will work through each of these.
As a business community we will work through each of these with you. As a nation we will work through them together.
In the midst of this global financial crisis, Australia remains in strong shape.
It's important in a crisis to be mindful of the challenges we face, neither to understate them nor to overstate them. It is equally important to be mindful of the strengths that we have.
We have the best regulated banking system in the world. The World Economic Forum recently rated Australia's banking system equal second out of 134 banking systems in the world when measured against soundness and stability  -  with those of the US and UK ranking 40 and 44. The world today has now approximately 12 AA rated banks  -  and four of those 12 are the four major Australian banks.
Our banks' balance sheets are strong. Our banks are profitable.
Since the introduction of the government's guarantee 10 days ago, the banks have reduced their mortgage rates by a further 20 to 25 basis points  -  directly attributing these moves to the actions taken by the Government.
Spreads in interbank lending have also started to reduce - although they remain high by historical standards. The Government's bottom line is also in excellent shape.
The Government set aside a large budget surplus in May as a buffer for the future, as a buffer for tough times ahead. And those tough times have come. That's why we were able to act quickly, effectively and decisively on the $10.4 billion stimulus package last week.
Most other governments around the world are faced with the similar need for a stimulus package, but were not in the same strong position as Australia because most were already in deficit.
Australia by contrast has been able to harmonise fiscal policy stimulus with the recent monetary policy moves by the Reserve Bank of Australia  -  the 100 basis point interest rate cut.
The Government has also indicated that come December, we will begin to bring forward our nation-building agenda on infrastructure  -  needed for our economic future, needed also to provide continued stimulus to the economy.
As a result, while most of the developed world has gone into negative growth, we continue to project positive economic growth for the future  -  although at a rate considerably slower than before.
And while this will be tough to maintain, the Government remains absolutely determined to do what is necessary, to do whatever is necessary to continue to support positive growth, to continue to support stability, to continue to support confidence into the future.
Part of the Government's strategy lies in the proper coordination of policy action with the global economic community as well. A global financial crisis requires a global financial solution on liquidity, on regulation, on transparency.
A global economic crisis also requires global economic action  -  including coordinated fiscal policy action. After intense economic and political diplomacy in recent weeks, Australia now has a formal seat at the negotiating table of the world when the G20 heads of government sit down on these matters in Washington on the 15th of November.
Some argued that the G7, the Group of Seven Nations of old, was just sufficient for this purpose. We argued the reverse.
I congratulate the Government of the United States for its decision to recognise the reality of the 21st century economic order, where the centre of gravity in the global economy is increasingly moving to the Asia Pacific region.
Australia has vital national interests at stake in the negotiation of the new rules of the global financial system and the new rules of the wider global economic order.
Australia will be playing an active role because decisions taken in Washington and in the meetings that will follow the Washington summit will directly affect our economy, our financial system, our businesses and our jobs.
Getting the international regulatory system in order is also part of the overall confidence equation for the future as well.
And confidence is critical, hence my earlier remark to be absolutely objective about the strengths we in Australia have, as well as objective about the challenges we face.
Confidence is also built on the integrity, the independence and the performance of our financial and economic regulators: The Treasury, the Reserve Bank of Australia, the Australian Prudential Regulatory Authority and ASIC.
These are national institutions. They are first class national institutions. They are national institutions worth defending and they have served this nation well at a time of unprecedented financial and economic challenge. At a time of global financial crisis, all Australian leaders should be supporting our institutions, not undermining them.
To attack these institutions at a time of global financial crisis is not just irresponsible. It is also reckless given the impact such attacks have on confidence and on the real economy.
When people's businesses, people's jobs and people's confidence in our financial institutions are at stake, this is not a time to play political games.
I believe that small business also has a crucial role to play in fortifying our economy during difficult economic circumstances.
Australia's two million small businesses employ four million. Australia's small businesses contribute one third of our nation's gross domestic product. If small business is strong, the overall economy is strong. It is as simple as that.
If small business is held back then the economy is held back and it is as simple as that.
Running a small business can be a tough job at the best of times. I know that from my own experience, having run one for a time myself. While many people depend on you, sometimes the only person you can depend on is yourself.
Customers want deliveries on time and on budget. Suppliers want payment on time.
Employees want reliable hours and payment and career opportunities.
But if there is extra paper work to be done, or another crisis to solve, it's your responsibility, as the owner, to look after it. There's no government policy that is going to make running a business easy but I do believe that we can make it less hard.
And that's what I am here to talk to you about today and that is why the Ministers are here together with you today to hear what you have to say to us. This is a two-way dialogue.
And how we can do this, that is, bring about good policy for the future in an economic climate such as what confronts us at the moment represents a unique challenge to us both.
But I believe we can do it.
We've heard a lot about the global financial crisis but there's been less public discussion of the impacts it has for small business. It is well known that small business is the first to feel the effects of weaker economic conditions.
Customers close their wallets. Orders drop. Cash flow dries up.
Small business is also the first to feel the effects of tighter credit markets. Getting credit in the current environment is not only about business growth and new opportunities, it's about also having sufficient credit to sustain cash-flow and staying afloat.
Recent evidence paints a sobering picture of the challenges facing our small business community.
According to the October edition of the Private Business Barometer published by PricewaterhouseCoopers: sales growth is down from 13.2 per cent to 10.9 per cent in the past year; profit growth is down from 11.3 per cent to 10.3 per cent; hiring intentions have fallen from 46.1 per cent to 26.7 per cent; credit availability is a growth impediment in two-thirds of businesses; and the family home is security to obtain business finance for two-thirds of businesses.
That data precedes the most recent twists and turns in the global financial crisis.
These findings are backed up by the macroeconomic indicators available for Government showing lower consumer and business confidence, lower new housing starts, and lower motor vehicle sales.
These sort of findings have also underpinned the Government's decision to introduce the $10.4 billion Economic Security Strategy last week.
That strategy was designed to provide stimulus to the economy, stimulus to households through payments through the family payments system of $1,000 per child over the next nine months. Payments also to pensioners, single pensioners and married pensioners, $1,400 for single pensioners, $2,100 for pensioner couples  -  again designed to provide stimulus to the economy.
Beyond that we have been mindful of the impact which the financial crisis is having directly and indirectly on the housing sector.
That's why as part of this economic security strategy we are investing $1.5 billion in the First Home Owners Boost to strengthen the housing sector:
Doubling the First Home Owners Grant to $14,000. Trebling the First Home Owners Grant to $21,000 where a first home buyer chooses a newly constructed dwelling.
These are designed to provide a much-needed shot in the arm for the housing sector and to provide a boost for small businesses such as builders, material manufacturers, and those working in the property market more generally.
By strengthening lines of credit and strengthening consumer demand, the Government is doing its best to strengthen the small business sector in this economy during this difficult period.
As I said before, Government cannot make running a small business easy, but we can make it less hard.
What I'd like to propose today is a government guarantee to pay all of the federal government's contracts, up to $1 million, to small business, on time, within 30 days. That's almost 70,000 contracts a year. And if we don't, the proposal is this: you and small business can charge us interest until we do. We intend to lead by example.
I'd also urge larger businesses to pay on time as well. It makes a big difference to small businesses with cash flow challenges.
Another aspect is procurement. Every year the Commonwealth spends about $30 billion on goods and services. And today I commit the Government to making it easier for small businesses to gain access to Australian Government business.
Following on from the SourceIT template contract design for simple ICT procurements, we're moving to standardise other procurement documents. Agencies will also be required to review their operations and simplify procurement processes.
Greater consistency and simpler processes will make it cheaper and easier for small business to participate in tenders.
I'm also aware that the Tax Office is committed to working with small businesses that are having difficulty in meeting their tax obligations, including allowing for tax debts to be paid by instalments over a period of time.
If businesses are having problems, they should talk direct to the Tax Office. Assistance offered will be based on the taxpayer's individual circumstances.
And today I'm also announcing that we're putting an extra $4 million into business enterprise centres and other registered business organisations to assist in getting information out to the small business community on the sorts of services which are available and on information necessary to negotiate some of the difficult times which will lie ahead.
These initiatives build on our recent economic policies for the broader economy in our stronger commitment to a prosperous small business sector.
Many thousands of small businesses already have access to the advice and assistance through the Government's $42 million Small Business Advisory Centre initiative which provides Commonwealth funding for the first time to 36 business enterprise centres around Australia.
Ladies and gentleman, these are the beginning of the government's response to the challenges that small business faces as consequence of the global financial crisis.
More fundamentally, we're been concerned to ensure that this economy continues to generate positive economic growth. That has underpinned the government's decision to bring forward this significant stimulus package which equals some one percentage point of GDP.
But the stimulus, as I've indicated before, that is step one.
Step two will come in December when the Government unfolds its plans for the beginning of a roll out of our national infrastructure program  -  a Building Australia program  -  building infrastructure for the future. Ports, roads, rail, hospitals, education institutions and the rest. All to support the country's long term infrastructure needs. All for continued sustained economic stimulus in what will be a challenging time ahead.
But finally, also in providing the guarantees that we've provided to our banks for their term wholesale funding arrangements. Anchored in this simple principle, that as a business it is absolutely necessary to have lines of access to credit. And therefore, in the face of a global credit squeeze which has come off the back of this global financial crisis, to provide the necessary guarantees by government, unprecedented guarantees by government in this country, to ensure that our banks can continue to access effectively international lines of credit in order to make credit available to business users in this country.
These are the measures we've taken so far. As I've indicated before, we stand ready to take other measures as becomes necessary to maintain continued confidence and stability in the Australian financial system and to continue to support positive economic growth in Australia.
To do that, we need the cooperation and support of the Australian business community, we need the cooperation and support of the small business community within it, and we look forward to your comments today.


First of all, if I could begin by thanking the Governor-General. The Governor-General, Her Excellency Quentin Bryce, is no fair weather friend to this cause - going back now 13 years, a regular and continuing participant, supporter and high level advocate of this important centre and the work that it does.
Your Excellency, we thank you for your commitment past, present and future.
We're often asked why we are engaged in particular causes in public life. And there are many causes. Almost all of them exceptionally worthwhile.
When I look around Australia today and I see the extraordinary range of families who are affected by this extraordinary disease  -  breast cancer - this is a very personal cause for so many families who are so personally affected.
And I look at those numbers, 12,000 freshly diagnosed each year, that is an extraordinary number. An extraordinary number of people's lives who are changed in an instant, and whose life journey changes for the future.
There's one reason I'm here, because those numbers speak for themselves, they are huge. And we need to do something about it.  We need to do more about it.
The second reason is entirely personal. I'm here because of mum. Mum was diagnosed with breast cancer back in 1963. I was five years old. She had a radical mastectomy. Rural Queensland. Not much to go by in those days. She had a recurrence in 1973.
And my message to you all who are sufferers from this disease is that mum died in 2004 of different causes, 41 years later.
What I do remember, I remember clearly, as a little boy and then growing up, what she lived with all that time in terms of the challenge, the uncertainty, the difficulty, the at that time variable medical treatment that was available. And that she was a survivor, a true survivor.
So, for all of you who are here today as women who have survived and who continue the fight and are part of families who are part of that fight, I congratulate  you for this thing alone  -  your human courage and example.
A lot's happened since 1963. As Tanya mentioned before, we now have a survival rate at five years of 88 per cent. This is an extraordinary number, the product of early detection, a lot of work that has gone on aided and supported by the work of this extraordinary centre and foundation.
Also the extraordinary work which has happened with our researchers, our scientists, our medical pioneers. This has been an extraordinary effort by the nation to turn this around and I salute each and every one of you who are professionals in the field.
In our most recent Budget we have allocated $40 million explicitly for dealing with the challenge of Breast Cancer. In September we have provided $2.5 million to the National Breast Cancer Foundation to partner with them in a new $5 million study of 100,000 and more Australian women about this important disease.
And today I would confirm a further allocation of $800,000 to NBOCC for their work as an additional grant for their work in 08/09*. Your work is worthy of this support.
I am also proud to launch today NBOCC's cheeky check up campaign to promote breast cancer awareness in young women. I am not sure why I have been given that task but have and I am discharging it as effectively as I can.
Research undertaken by the NBOCC has revealed that many young women are not informed about what to look for, are less likely to seek medical advice if they find a symptom and are unclear about the important risk factors for breast cancer.
Armed with this evidence the centre has developed a campaign to help young women be proactive about their health. It's an approach the Australian Government fully supports.
We believe that keeping people well and preventing disease is an important part of managing and caring for those who are sick. Giving younger women the information they need to know more about breast cancer and dispelling some myths equips them to act early, and acting and detecting breast cancer early is the best way to assist in treatment and improve chances of survival. The Government which I lead is proud to be a partner with NBOCC in this great cause.
Working together we can make a real difference to the quality of lives of many women diagnosed with breast cancer around Australia, their families and their carers who every day confront the realities, the very practical realities of this disease. I want to congratulate the National Breast and Ovarian Cancer centre for all its great work.
And as I close, each of you who work in this field as medical practitioners, as nurses, as scientists and those at the coalface who are providing care, I would encourage each of you in your work.
You know as a country, as a nation we need to do much, much better in the war against cancer, cancer in all its forms. It's time as a nation we renewed our national effort in what must be a national war against cancer and I look forward to being an active, very active partner with you in that great cause.
Thank-you very much
*09-10


Australia today finds itself confronting extraordinary economic circumstances  -  a global financial crisis of a magnitude not seen since the Great Depression.
Some of the world's oldest and most revered financial institutions have either collapsed or been bailed out.
In the United States. In the United Kingdom. And in Europe.  All within the space of a few months.
Three months ago few would have predicted the scale and ferocity of the dislocation of financial markets that we see today.
And few are willing to predict where we will be three months from now.  We are truly in uncharted waters.
And the challenge for policymakers is to navigate those waters, deploying all the possible instruments available: fiscal policy, monetary policy, regulatory policy. 
For the Australian Government, we confront three critical challenges.
     * To anticipate future events and, where possible, act ahead of the curve.
     * To respond to unfolding events with early, decisive, strong action.
     * To lay the underlying long term policy framework to build an economy which emerges from the current crisis stronger and more resilient for the future.
And our challenge as leaders is to do all this while building confidence through decisive policy action in the national interest, rather than by undermining confidence through partisan political manoeuvring.
The question many Australians are asking themselves right now as they see the daily avalanche of bad economic news on their TV screens is “how did we get here?”
The alarm bells on this financial crisis started to ring far away in the distressed mortgage belts of American suburbia some fourteen months ago, when we all started to learn about this hitherto obscure financial instrument known as sub-prime mortgages.
What we have seen since then is a series of escalating events overseas  -  including dramatic contractions of debt markets and significant losses on equities markets.
We had seen the failure or bail out of four major banks: Northern Rock in February, Bear Stearns in March, Countrywide and IndyMac in July.
By the middle of this year, however, markets appeared to be calming.
Some analysts said the worst was behind us.
But then, on September 7 the world changed.
The unprecedented $100 billion bail out of US mortgage giants Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac began a chain reaction which drew the financial crisis into a new and dangerous phase.
Within a week Lehman Brothers  -  formerly the 4th largest investment bank in the United States - had collapsed  -  producing the largest bankruptcy in US history.
On the same day, Merrill Lynch  -  another iconic Wall Street name and the world's largest brokerage firm - was rescued by Bank of America.
Three days later the Federal Reserve announced that it would put US$85 billion on the line to stop the collapse of American International Group (AIG)  -  the world's largest insurance company.
And by the end of September, seven more major institutions had reached crisis point: Washington Mutual; Fortis Group; Wachovia; Bradford and Bingley; the Icelandic Glitnir Bank; German finance company Hypo Real Estate, and European Dexia Corporation.
The collapse of so many financial institutions caused share markets to fall dramatically in the United States and around the world.
With fear and anxiety paralysing the financial system, the economic crisis had the potential to deteriorate into a full blown catastrophe.
As the head of the IMF, Dominique Strauss-Kahn said on 12 November:
“the global financial system [is on] the brink of systemic meltdown.” 
Unprecedented times call for unprecedented measures  -  and the world's governments swung into action.
On September 21, U.S. Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson proposed a plan under which the U.S. Treasury would acquire up to $700 billion worth of mortgage-backed securities  -  an action that would amount to more than $4000 per working American.
On October 8, the British Government announced a bank rescue package of around £500 billion  -  including £50 billion to recapitalise banks.
These actions were followed by Governments around the world  -  all prepared to take extraordinary measures to deal with these extraordinary events.
As the crisis unfolded, most governments were immersed in the immediate imperative of averting financial disaster.
But in the back of their minds they knew that even if they were successful, they would face a long hangover as the financial turmoil spilled over into the real economy - causing slower global growth and rising unemployment.
Even before the events of late September, the IMF had revised down its estimates of global growth.
The IMF predicted that:
“The world economy is now entering a major downturn ... and the major advanced economies are already in or close to recession.”  (IMF WEO)
For the fourth time in 12 months, the IMF revised down their forecasts for growth in the major advanced economies from 0.9 per cent to 0.1 per cent in 2009.
The IMF is now forecasting growth in 2009 of less than 1 per cent in six of the G-7 economies. 
This will be the slowest growth in the advanced economies for over a quarter of a century. 
And since that forecast was released, the UK economy has recently recorded negative 0.5 per cent growth in the third quarter - the first quarterly contraction since 1992.
We face challenging times in the global economy for the year ahead.
     * More than 25 banks around the world have collapsed or been bailed out.
     * Liquidity has become scarce with the LIBOR-OIS spread reaching around 300 basis points this month  -  more than 30 times its average level in early 2007.
     * Global stock markets have fallen by as much as 40 per cent.
     * Consumer confidence has fallen to its lowest level in three decades across OECD economies, and to the lowest levels in one and a half decades in the US, UK and New Zealand.
Australia has exhibited great resilience in the face of the shockwaves of the global financial crisis.
The fundamentals of the Australian economy are sound.
We have a strong regulatory framework.
Our banking system is profitable and well capitalised.
We have four of the world's 14 AA rated banks.
We are in a stronger fiscal position than almost all other developed countries  -  with the budget surplus we set aside.
We go into this period ahead with higher growth than most other countries.
And we go into this period ahead with lower unemployment than most other countries.
But we must level with the Australian people: we are not immune from this crisis.
We are feeling its impacts now.
And we will be feeling its impacts long into the future.
Already the ripple effects of the financial meltdown in the United States have affected Australia.
     * The ASX200 has lost nearly 40 per cent of its value since the crisis began.
     * Business confidence is low - NAB's September quarter business survey released today shows business conditions are at their lowest level in seven years.
     * Consumer confidence is also low - the Westpac-Melbourne Institute Index of Consumer Sentiment fell by 11 per cent this month.
     * Housing credit growth is now at its weakest level since 1983. 
     * Building approvals are down by 8.6% from last year to the lowest level since April 2001.
And the crisis is already having an impact on the Australian dollar.
In the past, financial crises including the Asian financial crisis in 1997 and the tech wreck in 2000 both had a very significant impact on the Australian Dollar.
The Reserve Bank has independent authority to operate in the market in relation to the Australian dollar if and when they believe it is appropriate.
In response to the global crisis, the Government has taken decisive action in two critical areas:
     * To maintain the stability of Australian financial markets; and
     * To underpin growth in the economy.
On 12 October the Government took two unprecedented decisions in the history of the Commonwealth.
The Government provided a guarantee on the deposits of all Australian regulated deposit taking institutions - banks, building societies and credit unions - to maintain confidence in the system.
Second, the Government simultaneously announced a guarantee of banks' term wholesale funding to ensure they could access global credit in the future and therefore continue lending to business.
The first of these guarantees covered $800 billion in deposits, covering more than 15 million Australian deposit accounts.
The second covered an extraordinary $1.2 trillion in bank funding.
These actions covered the core elements of the Australian financial system.
They were necessary in the national interest.
In the weeks preceding the government's announcement, it became clear that events were entering a dangerous spiral.
Globally, confidence in the banking and finance sectors was shattered.
Money market liquidity reached a record low, credit spreads widened and exchange settlement account balances rose to record highs in both Australia and around the world.
On October 7 2008, the main indicator of interbank liquidity in the Australian market (the spread between the 90 day bank bill and the 3 month overnight indexed swap) closed at 141.3 basis points, around 10 times the pre-crisis level.
Exchange settlement account balances at the RBA averaged more than $9 billion in the week preceding the 12 October announcement, after reaching more than $11 billion on 30 September. 
This compares with a typical level before the start of the sub-prime crisis in mid-2007 of less than $1 billion. 
It was an even worse story in many other markets throughout the world.
In the United States, the comparable credit spread (3 month London Interbank Offer Rate  -  the LIBOR - and 3 month overnight index swap) reached almost 350 basis points, when the pre-crisis level was typically around 10 basis points. 
Equity markets were also collapsing.
The Australian market fell more than 8 per cent on Friday 10 October  -  the worst day since October 1987.
The US Dow Jones had its worst week ever, even worse than the 1929 stock market crash.
Financial markets in many countries were closed as a result of significant share price falls.
By October 1 more than 25 major banks around the world had failed.
Around the world, people were losing confidence in their banking systems.
And the contagion was spreading  -  as people watched a nightly stream of negative news on their TV screens.
Despite Australia's internationally strong banking system, the Australian government listened to concerns that the introduction of comprehensive banking guarantees in other parts of the world may accelerate liquidity problems in our system.
We were also listening to the concerns of depositors.
Confidence in our banking system was beginning to be called into question  -  and banking organisations began communicating their concerns to government.
We knew we had to act to restore confidence in the banking system.
Our guarantee was comprehensive  -  it was an historic policy decision.
It had to be.
The scheme is available for 100 per cent of the deposits in eligible Authorised Deposit-taking Institutions. 
Of this, something like 99.5 per cent of deposit accounts are covered free of charge, with institutions able to choose to seek coverage for their remaining depositors in return for a fee. 
The financial regulators supported the measures the government adopted.
APRA Chairman John Laker said:
“The Government's deposit term and funding guarantee, which APRA fully supports, has calmed what was a growing disquiet on the part of some depositors.”
RBA Governor Glenn Stevens said:
“...  Steps in these directions, in the context of what other countries were doing, were sensible and the RBA supported them.”
Australia was at risk of large withdrawals by domestic and international depositors if we did not act  -  despite the strength of our banking system. 
A confidence problem was emerging because of the tide of international sentiment and the actions of various foreign governments.
A failure to act could have meant significant difficulties accessing credit, higher loan rates.
This would have in turn affected investment and consumption and ultimately our growth and employment. 
If the government had only guaranteed deposits up to $100,000, as some argued, we would be excluding around 40 per cent of all deposits by value and some ¾ of a million deposit accounts.
The consequences of a partial guarantee under the prevailing circumstances would have been destabilising in the extreme.
It would have left those depositors with the largest amounts of cash without a guarantee - and therefore inclined to move their money to the big four banks and away from a range of other financial institutions.
Or even withdraw their cash entirely from the Australian banking system.
The effect of the Government's decisive action on that critical weekend was to maintain confidence and stability in the banking system.
Australian financial institutions are now lending to each other again.
Since the guarantee has started to flow through, exchange settlement balances held at the RBA have fallen from a peak of $11.2 billion on 20 October to $6.3 billion on 24 October. 
Importantly for Australian families:
     * It has given mums and dads the confidence that their deposits are safe;
     * And it has put downward pressure on bank funding costs and therefore on interest rates.
Since the guarantee, several major banks have reduced their rates by around 0.2%.
And in doing so, they noted that the Government's guarantee was part of the reason they were able to do this.
As Ahmed Fahour, NAB Executive Director and CEO Australia, said:
" policy measures announced by the Australian Government earlier this month have started to have a positive impact .... we hope to be in a position where we can pass on further interest rate cuts to our customers."
As the ANZ Chief Executive Officer Australia, Brian Hartzer said:
“We are pleased to deliver on the promise we made in January to pass on reductions in funding costs as we see market conditions easing.
“...policy  measures both here in Australia and around the world have restored some confidence to the global investment community and this is resulting in an easing of high wholesale funding rates.”
The Government has acted decisively to protect the economy, protect the banking system and help the countless Australians who are going to benefit from reduced interest rates.
We are making sure that millions of mums and dads know their savings are secure.
And that is critical for confidence.
The Government's guarantee does not extend to market-linked investments.
The Government has an obligation to protect bank deposits as these are held within APRA-regulated authorised deposit taking institutions.
Guaranteeing bank deposits is one thing.
But guaranteeing market-linked investments with pre-advertised risk profiles is another.
All elements of the financial system benefit from the stability given to the core elements of the system (i.e. the deposits and loans of Authorised Deposit-taking Institutions) by the Government's guarantees.
Just as all elements of the system have been directly affected by the global financial crisis.
And that includes market-linked investments  -  given the extraordinary movements that have occurred on global and Australian equity, property and capital markets as the global crisis has intensified.
The truth is, a number of investors had been shifting out of market-linked investment products for some time as the global financial crisis worsened and it became clearer that the assets underpinning these investments were being buffeted.
It is a matter of public record that before the turmoil of the first two weeks of October, and the Government's guarantee announcement that followed, more than 10 pooled retail mortgage trust funds had already frozen redemptions as there had already been a shift away from various investment products toward banking products.
This has also occurred many times in the past as a consequence of previous global economic downturns.
The Government continues to work with the non-APRA regulated institutions to help find solutions to liquidity problems in these extraordinary times.
Treasury, in consultation with ASIC and APRA, is systematically working through the challenges faced by these institutions in dialogue with them and their peak bodies.
As part of this process, Treasury has taskforces dealing with each category of market-linked investments institutions in what is a complex sector involving highly diverse and risk-differentiated investment products.
For example, the Treasurer announced recently that Treasury and ASIC are investigating the impact of the global financial crisis on cash management trusts to provide advice on what actions might be appropriate to support this sector of the economy.
As the Treasurer also announced, ASIC is specifically examining its powers to provide additional flexibility to funds managers and trustees to allow for redemptions in investor hardship cases, where redemptions have been frozen.
Similarly, Treasury officials are examining (in consultation with industry) the impact of the global financial crisis on mortgage trusts, debenture issuers and other non-prudentially regulated investment entities and to provide advice on what actions might be appropriate to support this sector of the economy.
But in all this, there is a fundamental bottom line for taxpayer supported government guarantees  -  and that is the difference between prudentially regulated deposit-taking institutions on the one hand, and market-linked investments with higher risks and higher returns on the other.
No Government can, in good conscience, put tax-payers' dollars at risk to support financial institutions which are not open, transparent, and properly accountable to Australian regulators.
That is why the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA) will accelerate its processing of applications by investment vehicles to become prudentially regulated  -  if they so apply.
APRA stands ready to respond to applications from entities seeking to become ADIs where they are able to meet Australia's regulatory requirements.
This will not be possible for all institutions which apply, but this opportunity is available to those market-linked investment vehicles which wish to move into the prudentially regulated sector.
Subject to the successful application of these financial institutions (which means meeting the prudential standards), they will of course be covered by the government guarantee.
But only if they meet the prudential standards of deposit taking institutions.
APRA, ASIC and Treasury will be resourced as necessary to deal with this increased work load both in relation to the unprecedented demands on regulators as well as expeditiously handling an increased rate of applications for prudential regulation.
Australia's regulators are first class.
They have consistently outperformed their international counterparts.
They are national institutions.
And they require absolute bipartisan support  -  in word and in deed.
To do anything other is reckless at a time of global financial crisis.
The Government has drawn on the economic policy machinery in the government and the independent regulators to advise us during these challenging times.
These institutions have performed well.
The Council of Financial Regulators, which comprises Treasury, the Reserve Bank, APRA and ASIC, has been closely monitoring developments and assisting the government to ensure Australia has the best financial policy responses in place at a time of global financial crisis.
Each morning, I meet with the Treasurer, the Secretary of my Department, the Secretary to the Treasury and other senior officials to assess the latest economic and financial market developments, both in Australia and abroad, to get a clear measure of the domestic and international outlook and any necessary policy responses.
The Government has also mobilised the International Economic Policy Group to provide coordinated advice to the government on its international strategy  -  with particular focus on the G-20 meetings as well as the upcoming APEC Leaders meeting and East Asia Summit leaders meeting.
The group includes senior officials from my department, Treasury, the Reserve Bank, DFAT and the Office of National Assessments. 
This is also an important mechanism to ensure consistency in our domestic and international initiatives.
All critical matters are brought before the Strategic Policy and Budget Committee of the Cabinet for decision.
During this unprecedented crisis, with critical events occurring across multiple time zones, often requiring officials to work in shifts, the machinery of government has been working well.
But the challenges ahead remain great and there are many tests that lie before us.
The Government's economic strategy has two fundamental objectives:
     * to maintain the stability of the financial system;
     * and to support positive economic growth at a time of likely global economic recession.
In acting on the first, the Government enacted on October 12 the double bank guarantees.
In acting on the second the Government announced a $10.4 billion Economic Security Strategy on October 14.
This is equivalent to 1 per cent of GDP.
Through practical support for households and across the economy more broadly, we are supporting continued positive growth.
The elements of the package are:
     * a $4.8 billion down payment on long-term pension reform
         * single pensioners will receive a lump sum payment in December of $1,400 and pensioner couples will receive $2,100
         * carers will receive $1,000 for each person they care for;
     * $3.9 billion in payments to eligible children
         * this will provide a payment to families of $1,000 per eligible child
         * there are about 3.8 million eligible children;
     * doubling the first home buyers grant to $14,000 and tripling it to $21,000 for those who buy a newly constructed home;
     * doubling the number of productivity training places to 113,000 in this financial year; and
     * bringing forward the Government's nation building agenda on infrastructure.
This package will provide a boost to families in need.
It will provide a boost to pensioners and carers.
It will provide a boost for the construction sector as well as helping families realise the dream of owning their own home.
And it will address long-term productivity challenges by boosting training and bringing forward investment in infrastructure.
It is an Economic Security Strategy to see us over the short-term challenges and to position the economy to continue to grow in the long-term.
Another critical element of laying the foundation for long-term economic growth is our nation building agenda.
We kick-started the process by establishing Infrastructure Australia earlier this year.
Infrastructure Australia is an independent statutory council headed by Sir Rod Eddington.
Its first task was to produce an audit of the nation's infrastructure by the end of 2008.
In response to the global financial market crisis, the Commonwealth agreed at the October COAG meeting that they would bring forward an interim report on the National Infrastructure Audit and the Infrastructure Priority List in December.
In just ten months of Government, we have committed to a long-term $76 billion infrastructure investment program for the future including over time:
     * We'll invest $26 billion in roads and rail infrastructure through 2008-09 to the end of AusLink II.
     * We'll invest $20 billion through the Building Australia Fund in transport and communication priorities.
     * And from this, we'll invest almost $5 billion in a National Broadband Network.
     * We'll also invest $15 billion in education infrastructure, through the Education Investment Fund, trade training centres in schools, computers in our classrooms, and by investing in our universities.
     * We'll invest $11 billion in health and hospitals infrastructure, through the Health and Hospitals Fund and other programs.
Through these investments, we will boost economic activity during a time of global uncertainty and build the foundations of future prosperity.
Remember it is critical that through this global financial crisis, we continue to advance the Government's long-term economic reform agenda  -  to build long-term productivity growth:
     * through a continued quantitative and qualitative investment in the education revolution  -  in education, skills and training;
     * modernising the nation's infrastructure; and
     * embarking on comprehensive regulatory and tax reform; and
     * reforming the Federation, the last remaining frontier of micro-economic reform in Australia.
Because of the nature of the global financial crisis, we also need to do more than just respond at home.
The global financial crisis has brought home to us all one message very clearly  -  we live in an interconnected world.
A financial crisis in the United States has reverberated quickly and in devastating fashion around the globe.
The Australian Government has taken rapid action to counter the domestic impacts of the crisis.
But we need coordinated, effective international action as well.
I warmly welcome President Bush's initiative in calling a meeting of leaders of the member of the Group of Twenty nations  -  the G-20.
This is a first-class initiative.
The G-20 was established after the 1997 Asian Financial Crisis.
It has brought together on a regular basis the finance ministers and central bank governors from the world's major developed and emerging economies.
It includes the United States and Japan; it includes China and India.
It is a group with real economic clout  -  both for the present and the future.
     * Its members represent 85 per cent of the global banking system.
     * They represent 90 per cent of global economic activity
     * 80 per cent of world trade.
Because of its broadly representative membership, the Group has legitimacy when it comes to dealing with a global crisis.
The meeting called by President Bush for 15 November in Washington will be an important opportunity for the major players to coordinate our responses to the global financial crisis and the economic impact it is having.
At this meeting, the leaders of the G-20 nations must agree on clear, strong, action.
The outcomes must include a framework for the international community to work together to better manage the current financial crisis.
And we must agree to learn from our mistakes and to work towards common solutions that will serve to mitigate the risks of similar crises re-emerging in the future.
And beyond these two important objectives, a third objective must be coordinated action to support the global economy to deal with the emerging reality of a likely global recession.
These outcomes are not assured.
G-20 nations will need to work hard to implement clear, strong, action-orientated outcomes.
Australia has a real national interest at stake in shaping the international response.
A fundamental role of leadership in the midst of a global crisis of the type we are experiencing is to underpin confidence.
Confidence in our financial institutions.
Confidence in our markets.
Confidence in our economy.
Because confidence in the current environment is a fragile commodity; whatever the strength of the fundamentals.
We all saw the huge blow to confidence from the US Congress's initial failure to pass the recent bailout package.
It is incumbent upon all of us in political leadership to be very careful about what we say.
Now is not the time to be questioning the head of the Commonwealth Treasury.
Now is not the time to be attacking the head of the Reserve Bank.
Now is not the time to talk about bipartisanship and then turn around and undermine political support for the guarantee on bank deposits.
John Stewart of the National Australia Bank - a highly respected figure by all sides of politics in this country - said at the weekend that the design of the wholesale funding and deposit guarantees was sensitive, complex and it had been important to take the time to get it right; and furthermore that the politicisation of this process had been unhelpful in the markets.
Mr Stewart is absolutely right.
Confidence is a delicate but necessary commodity at a time of crisis.
It is maintained by concrete actions by governments and private institutions.
It is maintained by support for the independence and integrity of our national institutions.
It is also maintained by being frank with the Australian people about the strengths we have and the problems we face  -  and not playing or pandering to fear.
There will be difficult times ahead for Australia.
Even when markets do begin to stabilise, the impact of the global financial crisis on the real economy in Australia will be felt into the future.
On jobs.
On growth.
But with the right fiscal policy decisions, and monetary policy playing its role, there are rational grounds to be absolutely optimistic about Australia's future.
Optimistic that we can see through the impacts of the global financial crisis.
Optimistic that we can see the Australian economy emerge in stronger shape in the future.
The path ahead will not be smooth.
There will be difficult decisions along the way.
Decisions that won't be popular.
But decisions which will be taken in the national interest.


For 100 years Andrew Fisher has arguably been the least known of the 10 Australian Labor prime ministers who have served the Australian nation.
100 years later David Day's biography sets this to right.
By any historical benchmark, Fisher's most basic political achievements are the stuff of legend.
As a member of the Ayshire miners' union he worked for Keir Hardie who founded the British Labour Party.
He became one of Australia's first Labor members of Parliament, elected to the Queensland Assembly in 1893.
In 1899 he became a minister in the Dawson Government, the first Labor government anywhere in the world  -  or as the then Queensland Governor Sir Samuel Griffith said more prosaically in his dispatch to London: “the first instance in which a purely ‘Labour government' has been formed in any part of his majesty's dominions.”
While also noting with apprehension that six of the seven new Labor ministers had been, and I quote Griffith's dispatch, had “been engaged at some time in manual labour”.
In 1904, Fisher became a minister in the Watson federal government  -  the first national Labor government anywhere in the world.
And in 1910 Fisher achieved the truly extraordinary; at a general election becoming prime minister of the first majority Labor government   -  again the first anywhere in the world. Incidentally, with a majority in both houses.
By any measure this is an impressive series of firsts.
Fisher's critical legacy for Labor was to establish for the future that Labor was not only a viable political force but also most critically a successful electoral political force.
All achieved less than a generation after the formation of the party as the political voice of progressive politics in Australia.
Or as one newspaper recorded at the time, the Labor party was now “recognised by the representative of Her Majesty as one of the great Constitutional Parties of State from which Her Majesty's advisors are drawn.  There lies the triumph for Labor.”
These were not easy achievements. These were great achievements.
This also was the message that rang out across the world as nascent labour parties, social democratic parties, and democratic socialist parties across Europe watched with amazement, wonder and awe as Australia led the world, when through the ballot box they elected the working people's party to become the democratically-elected government of a sovereign state.
For the European parties this was still the stuff of dreams.
For many Europeans, the debate was whether any progressive political, economic and social reform could be achieved in the absence of violent revolution.
For the Europeans, the Australian Labor Party's political success represented new, peaceful and progressive political possibilities for the future.
In the great sweep of history, the history of ideas and the history of political movements, establishing the political fact that reform could be achieved by parliamentary means rather than revolutionary means was of seminal significance.
Fisher was in the midst of it.
Few Australians realise that when Fisher returned to Britain as Australian Labor Prime Minister, he was hailed as a national inspiration for what Labour could achieve in Britain.
For the British, nearly another generation would pass before Ramsey MacDonald was able to form government through a majority in the House of Commons.
Of course Fisher's contemporaries in Australia were less prone to take the broad view of Labor's early electoral successes in Australia.
Sydney's Daily Telegraph described the 1904 Labor Government as “a political freak”.
Echoed by The Times of London which warned in stentorian tones, as only The Times, could do, that having a Labour Government would prove to be a “painful lesson for Australians”.
The passage of time, however, does enable us to take a broader and more generous view properly informed by history.
Andrew Fisher should be honoured in Australian history as a political pioneer, as a social reformer and as a great Australian nationalist committed to the great task of Australian nation building.
I have spoken of Fisher the political pioneer.
But what of Fisher the social reformer? Fisher's visceral sense of social justice came of his experience as a child worker in the Ayshire coal mines.
These mines and the working conditions associated with them had barely emerged from the dark and bleak shadows of the Dickensian world of the late Industrial Revolution.
And for Fisher and his time and his experience this is not the stuff of literature. This was the stuff of cold daily hard reality. Miners dying in mine collapses; others being injured without any form, hope or prospect of compensation and still others dying the long and painful death of “black lung”.
Fisher's social justice was equally shaped by his experience of the Scottish Kirk. A deep belief that singing hymns on Sunday was rancid hypocrisy unless matched by work on Monday to help liberate the human condition not just the eternal souls of all human kind.
For Fisher, being a Sunday school teacher and a union activist was part of a seamless personality, a seamless reality, for him, a seamless mission in life.
His union advocacy was fearless, causing him to be black-banned from one pit after the other  -  and eventually forcing him to find a new life in Australia.
In Australia he campaigned for women's suffrage, he campaigned for workers' compensation, he campaigned for the aged pension, and as Prime Minister, served as Prime Minister when the first aged pension was paid on 1 July 1909.
He campaigned for the arbitration system and in 1912 he introduced something called, remarkably, a “baby bonus”  -  some 90 years before a certain other political party may have claimed to have done the same for the first time. But again, this is the stuff of history.
Fisher's social reform agenda was as deep as it was rich as it was broad.
But what of Fisher the great Australian nationalist? Fisher the nation builder?
Fisher introduced legislation to establish this nation's capital, Canberra. Fisher established the Royal Military College at Duntroon. The Fisher Government introduced military aviation training.
Fisher insisted that the newly formed Royal Australia Navy be under “complete local control”  -  words underlined by his own hand and with his own pen in the relevant Cabinet Memorandum.
Fisher introduced our first national currency. Fisher introduced national postage stamps which for the first time featured Australian national symbols rather than simply the monarch's head. Fisher Australianised the Australian coat of arms.
Fisher patronised the emergence of the Australian national school of painting  -  often retreating, as David Day's book describes, to the artists studio adjacent to his Melbourne parliamentary offices where the likes of Roberts and Streeton of the Heidelberg School were hard at work with the birth of Australian impressionism, crafting a new vision of Australia.
Fisher supported, although this was subsequently thwarted within the bureaucracy, the sending of an Australian team to the Stockholm Olympics in 1912 with an Australian team uniform and with Australian Government support. That was the promise, unfortunately a promise not delivered on.
Fisher brought the Northern Territory under the control of the Commonwealth for the first time in 1911. And in order to bring Western Australia more fully into the national fold he launched the trans-continental railway across the Nullarbor.
In sensing early the need for a distinctive Australian diplomatic presence and voice in the world, he personally commissioned the construction of Australia House in London  -  the building finally opened when he was High Commissioner in 1920.
Andrew Fisher was in every fibre of his being a passionate Australian nationalist, not just in idle and romantic sentiment, but much more importantly in the concrete, practical acts of nation building.
Barton had spoken of a nation for a continent, a continent for a nation. It was Fisher however who sought to shape these words into a reality, crafting a nation out of the idea of a nation.
But beyond all of these things, what of Andrew Fisher the man?
The stories I like most in David Day's biography are those of this simple son of the Ayshire coal fields and the Scottish Kirk visibly squirming at the prospect of having to wear court dress in order to meet the King in London.
Refusing time and time again to take imperial honours; and even at war's end, the war which scarred Fisher and the Labor movement for the following generation, refusing to accept the French Government's offer of a Legion of Honour.
These are signs, simple signs yet cogent signs of a gentle humility and dignity in Fisher which speak forcefully of this great man's integrity.
Australia is a greater nation because of the work of Andrew Fisher. Australia is a fairer society because of the work of Andrew Fisher. Australia has a more secure future because of the work of Andrew Fisher.
Andrew Fisher  -  a great Australian Prime Minister. And with great pride I launch this great biography of this great Australian. I thank you.


When I think back on how all this began, and I was talking briefly to Andrew as I walked into Kirribilli this morning, I go back to the discussion we had several months ago, at Coolum in Queensland. He had begun talking about this, that is what do we do about employment. And the most basic form of social justice available to any person at any time and in any place: that is the right to a job.
As he spoke, what appealed to me and struck me profoundly was his passion for the enterprise. He then said as a responsible and pragmatic businessman that on when this initiative could be begun, he said in six, or at most nine months time.
My response to him was, I hear you Andrew, let's launch it tomorrow  -  if you are up for it. Which if you know Andrew, is the best way to get him to agree to anything, ‘if you are up for it'. And he was. And that is why we are here.
You know, we are in the midst of a whole lot of bad news at the moment. But this is a good day for Australia. This is a good day for Australia. It is a good day involving good people seeking to do good things for the long term and the very long term.
In part I suppose, the apology to Indigenous people earlier this year in February has helped. The apology to Indigenous people was to set to rights an historical wrong. But it also had a view which said, let us build a bridge to the future. And that bridge was to be one of respect.
We can't begin talking to one another as a wider Australian community, or with anybody for that matter, unless there is respect among and between us.  And that in large measure was what the apology was about.
But having built a bridge of respect, you then move to what is then the next and most essential task: How do you then close the gap between Indigenous and non Indigenous Australians? And that is a very practical task. It is a very measurable task. It's a very hands on task.
Let me read to you what closing the gap actually means. To close the gap, and this is what we have committed to as a Government, to close the gap in life expectancy within a generation. And that life expectancy gap now is 17 years.
To halve the gap in mortality rates for Indigenous children under five within a decade. To ensure that all indigenous four year olds in remote communities have access to early childhood education within five years.
To halve the gap in reading, writing and numeracy achievements for indigenous children within a decade. To halve the gap for Indigenous students in year 12 attaining an equivalent attainment rate by 2020 of year 12 graduation.
And most critically, to halve the gap in employment outcomes between Indigenous and non Indigenous Australians within a decade.
These are known in the trade as ‘measurables'. These are known as outputs. These are known as things that you put in your annual report and you are measured against. Which is why when Andrew said to me, greeting me this morning as I arrived, ‘Prime Minister this is courageous'.
It's at that point that you have a Sir Humphrey Appleby moment because when someone says to you that you are providing courageous leadership you become instantaneously nervous. But you know something, I am really glad we have done it. I am really glad we have actually stepped across the line here.
So from Apology to closing the gap, to the future. And what are these practical steps to make that mission statement a possibility? You know something, there is something quite deep that we are celebrating here today.
I think we are celebrating also the death of ideology on this question, the absolute death of ideology. Because what we have recognised - and I say this for our political opponents as well- is this is no longer a question about can Government fix all these problems. As I say resolutely on behalf of the Government, Government cannot fix all these problems. We cannot. Let's just be honest about it, be upfront about it, tell the truth about it.
Because so many of the drivers here, so many of the core factors, lie way beyond the possibilities of Government. That is not to say that Government absolves itself of responsibility at all. Ours is to provide the framework, ours is to provide funding and resources to make other initiatives possible.
And we will do that and we will do it in spades. But you know something, it doesn't fix the problem. And the death of ideology lies in the fact that we are all here together as Australians. Indigenous, non Indigenous, all sides of politics, about one objective. That's how to fix this thing.
Whether it's through the work being done here on employment or more broadly, as I look across the community, the extraordinary work that has been done by some of our education institutions: the great boarding school revolution that is under way at the moment, as more and more of our private boarding schools are opening their doors to Indigenous kids around the country. That's great, that's fantastic. That's part of Government saying, ‘hey, you know something, this requires a much broader effort'.
When I look at outfits in Perth like the Clontarf Academy and what they're doing with sport and beyond sport in providing apprenticeship opportunities for young Indigenous people from across WA and across the Territory and now beyond. The emerging work in the Australian Rugby League and others.
This is all part of also recognising, you know, this is a bigger national effort.
And then we come to jobs. And we come to you as the leaders of Australian industry.
As Prime Minister of the country I just have one thing to say to you today, and that's thank you. Because you could have not come.  It's a tough time. Everyone's got a lot of other stuff on their plate. I understand that. I understand that more than many in terms of what's going on out there.
But you know, the great thing about this country is that we don't suspend the nation when we're dealing with a current challenge or crisis. The business of the nation goes on. And part of the business of the nation is to fix and to set right this great historical wrong.
And so this Australian Employment Covenant only works when you who provide jobs and provide jobs in difficult economic circumstances are willing to become partners with us and Andrew's great initiative.
And we'll succeed or fail based on you working with us and critically us working effectively with you.
One of the great hazards of government and bureaucracy is that it can be this great provider-driven monolith which sort of is an extension of some Soviet Union instrument of central planning, and just chugs along irrespective of what's actually happening out there. There's been a lot of essays written on this.
It also applies to training. And that is you have these great chugging monolithes out there providing blocks of training for this, that and the other, often, not always, often, oblivious to what actually is being demanded by businesses in concrete circumstances. That's our part of this covenant. That's going to be tough. Because you are going to say, ‘we're prepared to take on 100, 300, 500 indigenous people in employment, but we need the following skill-sets in the following locations delivered flexibly across this time frame.
And the old machinery of government is going to go “argh, how are we going to do that?”. And that's Brendan's responsibility. That's called the public delivery of the hospital pass. No, it's our responsibility.
But, this is hard. But we are determined to do it and to make it work. Because if these two things work together, your preparedness despite the circumstances you now confront to offer a job and the guarantee of a job, and our ability to work with you flexibly, creatively, and over time, in the specific training that you need to make that person job-ready or training-ready. Then, that's our part of the deal.
You know, when Noel spoke before, and I'm glad you stopped when you did stop about our earlier experiences working together a long, long, long time ago. Neither of us have changed since then. He used a very interesting phrase. And he used it repeatedly in his remarks just before. He described this as an act of faith. He said it again, an act of faith, and as an extension of I presume early-Lutheran theology, then referred the need to take a leap of faith. He went to a Lutheran college so I assume that is the case. And you know, he's dead right. Because faith is about something that you don't have concrete evidence for right now. It's actually embarking into the unknown and the partly unseen, but with a clear mission statement about what you want to do.
And there are two ways in which you can do these sort of things. You can sort of hang back and wait till all the Ts are crossed and the Is are dotted and all the facts and figures are certain, and probably wait another decade and nothing will happen, because it is an uncertain business, or, alternatively, you can gather together a group of good women and good men from across the country, people in business, people in Government and people beyond, set a mission statement for us all and then embark upon the journey. And that's what we're doing.
And this is going to be tough, because when it comes to delivering the measurables, not just of this program but more broadly of what we described before as closing the gap, others will hold up a sign at some stage in saying that you've only got two thirds of the way there, you've only got one third of the way there.
Okay, I accept all those criticisms in advance, if someone could record that for the permanent political record. But you know, I'd much rather in two years time, in four years time, be 20 per cent along the way, 30 per cent along the way, or 40 per cent along the way, or better, rather than having one rolling national workshop of national integrated hand-wringing about what we should do. I think we're past that.
Rupert's right. Right now there is I think an unprecedented mood in the nation to fix this despite our difficulties. And our challenge is to seize the day. And I thank you for seizing the day with me.
To conclude then, for you who lead us in industry and in business, I thank you from the bottom of my heart because you're critical to this.
To Jenny and to Brendan, as ministers, I thank them because this has been a very substantial piece of work.
To our Aboriginal leaders, to Noel, to Warren who is here as well, and other Aboriginal leaders, thank-you because this will only work as a three way partnership. It will only work as a three way partnership.
And so with those remarks, it is in this act of faith that I officially launch at Kirribilli the Australian Employment Covenant.


Today the world confronts the most profound financial and economic challenges in our lifetimes.
My purpose tonight is simple:
To define the Government's strategy to see Australia through this financial crisis;
To articulate our strategy to support the real economy in the face of a looming global recession;
To reaffirm the Government's long-term reform agenda beyond the crisis;
And to invite you, the leaders of Australia's business community, to join with the Government in sustaining that most important asset of all during a crisis such as this  -  and that is confidence.
The global economy today faces unprecedented challenges.
We are in the midst of the worst financial crisis since the Great Depression.
And that financial crisis is beginning to spill over into the real economy where it threatens to precipitate a deep and protracted global recession.
A recession that will threaten growth and jobs in Australia and around the world.
And on this it is important to level with the Australian people.
Consider just a few statistics defining the impact of the crisis on property and equity markets:
Shares on the New York Stock Exchange have lost more than a third of their value since this crisis began - falling 36.5 per cent.
Property values in the United States have fallen at a record rate, with the S&amp;P/Case-Shiller index showing house prices down 16.6 per cent per cent from a year earlier.
The financial crisis has spread beyond the United States to affect Europe as well as emerging markets in Asia and around the world.
     * In the last 12 months, the wealth held on major stock markets has fallen by a third.
     * In the last month global markets have lost US$11 trillion  -  equivalent to around 18 per cent of world GDP.
     * Japan's sharemarket is down more than 60 per cent  -  with the Nikkei Index at a 26 year low on Monday.
     * London's bourse has lost 36 per cent of its value.
     * The Shanghai index is down around 70 per cent.
The turmoil on equity markets reflects the turmoil on credit markets.
     * Liquidity has become scarce with the LIBOR-OIS spread reaching around 300 basis points this month  -  more than 30 times its average level in early 2007.
     * According to the Bank of England's latest Financial Stability Report, the global financial system is digesting mark-to-market losses on debt instruments of around US$2.8 trillion.
     * And the combined impact of a lack of liquidity and falling asset values has caused more than 25 banks around the world to collapse or be bailed out.
And turmoil on credit, equity and property markets impacts, of course, on the real economy.
Some economists are now estimating that the falls in stock markets and property markets alone will wipe $15 trillion dollars off the wealth of U.S. households  -  equivalent to an incredible 105 per cent of nominal US GDP.
And that means lower growth and higher unemployment.
Extraordinary times have called for extraordinary action.
Governments around the world have taken unprecedented action to prevent catastrophe.
Within the three weeks between September 7 and 25, the US government took decisive action to shore up many parts of the financial system:
It launched a US$100 billion bail-out for each of the two US mortgage giants Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac;
It loaned US$85 billion to American International Group (AIG) to avoid bankruptcy;
It launched a US$700 billion financial rescue plan for troubled assets;
The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation seized Washington Mutual; and
The Federal Reserve agreed to provide US$900 billion in short-term cash loans to banks.
In the same period, governments around the world have acted as well:
In an unprecedented move, central banks in the US, the UK, China, Canada, Sweden, Switzerland and the European Central Bank cut interest rates together by up to 0.5 per cent.
Countries including the UK, France, Germany, Italy, Denmark and Spain announced increased guarantees for depositors and new guarantees for wholesale funding.
Several European countries injected billions of dollars into their financial systems to partly nationalise their largest banks.
And in the coming weeks, members of the Group of 20 Nations will meet to discuss further global action to address the crisis.
This meeting in Washington on 15 November will provide a mechanism for the world's major economies to coordinate our responses to the global financial crisis and the economic impact it is having.
President Bush's leadership in calling this meeting of the G20 has been decisive.
It is the right decision because it looks to the future.
And it is a decision that Australia welcomes.
Australia has responded to the crisis with early action.
We have responded with decisive action.
We have responded with strong action.
Through the course of this year the Government has acted to maintain financial stability by:
Ensuring liquidity in our financial system by legislating to increase to $25 billion the maximum value of government bonds that can be issued at any one time;
Acting to protect financial institutions from predatory speculators by introducing an immediate ban on short selling;
Supporting competition and liquidity in the mortgage market by announcing a program to purchase up to $8 billion of residential mortgage backed securities;
Reaching agreement with the States on the reform of the regulation of credit in Australia by moving to a seamless national regulatory framework, and;
Taking a prominent role through the Financial Stability Forum to develop recommendations to reform international financial regulation.
In each of these areas, Australia has acted early, invariably ahead of the curve  -  anticipating events, rather than simply reacting to them.
On October 12 the Government took two further historic decisions to guarantee Australian deposits, and to guarantee term wholesale funding for APRA regulated banks, building societies, and credit unions.
The Government's action was necessary to maintain the stability of the financial system in the midst of destabilising developments abroad.
Importantly for Australian families:
It has given mums and dads the confidence that their deposits are safe;
It has put downward pressure on funding costs, and thereby downward pressure on interest rates; and
It has helped to stabilise financial markets.
As APRA Chairman John Laker said recently:
“The Government's deposit and funding guarantee, which APRA fully supports, has calmed what was a growing disquiet on the part of some depositors.”
All of the major banks have seen their costs of funding fall since the guarantee.
As Ahmed Fahour, NAB Executive Director and CEO Australia, has said:
"Policy measures announced by the Australian Government earlier this month have started to have a positive impact .... we hope to be in a position where we can pass on further interest rate cuts to our customers."
In the last two weeks, each of the major banks announced they will reduce their interest rates by around 0.2 per cent.
The Government has acted decisively because we know that our primary responsibility is to maintain confidence in the financial system.
A failure to act on the guarantees could have meant significant difficulties for Australian families and businesses seeking to access credit  -  as well as having to pay higher interest rates.
This could have in turn affected investment and consumption and ultimately our growth and employment. 
If the government had only guaranteed deposits up to $100,000, as some argued, we would be excluding around 40 per cent of all deposits by value and some ¾ of a million deposit accounts.
The consequences of a partial guarantee under the prevailing circumstances would have been destabilising in the extreme.
It would have left those depositors with the largest amounts of cash without a guarantee - and therefore inclined to move their money to the big four banks and away from a range of other financial institutions.
Some large depositors may have even withdrawn their cash entirely from the Australian banking system.
Any partial guarantee of deposits in the prevailing circumstances would have been irresponsible.
In relation to market-linked investments not covered by the deposit guarantee, the Government is working systematically with industry to maintain a secure, strong and diverse financial system. 
Treasury has taskforces dealing with each category of market-linked investments institutions in what is a complex sector involving highly diverse and risk-differentiated investment products.
I indicated on Tuesday that APRA is preparing to fast-track applications by mortgage funds and other financial institutions seeking to attain the status of a prudentially regulated APRA institution.
A number of financial institutions have indicated their interest in becoming APRA regulated ADIs  -  and their applications will be handled in the usual way by the regulators.
There is also an important role for the market in addressing some of the broader liquidity problems in other parts of the financial system.
Larger and more liquid institutions  -  including the major banks  -  could provide liquidity to various market-linked investment vehicles within the financial system by buying their securities at market prices.
Our major banks have performed responsibly during this crisis.
The banks are the beneficiaries of banking licences, and the Government's guarantee on deposits and wholesale funding.
It is not unreasonable, therefore, to expect that the banks will play a continuing role in supporting the wider financial system and thus the Australian national interest.
The Government has asked David Murray, Chairman of the Future Fund and former Chief Executive of the Commonwealth Bank, to assist the Treasury in its liaison with relevant financial institutions on this and related matters.
Mr Murray will be assisted by senior officers from the Treasury, APRA and ASIC.
As I have previously indicated, the Government will continue to respond in a calm, measured and methodical way to deal with the challenges that will continue to emerge in this sector in the future.
The Government has drawn on the economic policy machinery within the bureaucracy and the independent regulators to advise us during these challenging times.
The Government is in daily contact with the Treasury, the Reserve Bank, APRA and ASIC.
The International Economic Policy Group, the Strategic Policy and Budget Committee of Cabinet and the Council of Financial Regulators are meeting regularly to address the crisis in a coordinated fashion.
These institutions have performed well, giving timely advice and helping Australia stay ahead of the curve in addressing the crisis and maintaining confidence.
A lack of confidence can have devastating consequences for all market participants and lead to irrational behaviour by individual investors.
That is why governments, business and all responsible leaders have a joint responsibility through what we say and what we do to support confidence, not undermine it.
Confidence is a precious commodity at a time of crisis.
It is maintained by strong action by governments and private institutions.
And it is also supported by recognition of the independence and integrity of our national regulatory institutions.
It is also maintained by being frank with the Australian people about the strengths we have and the challenges we face  -  and not playing or pandering to fear.
The decisive policy action by governments around the world has helped stabilise financial markets more generally compared with the parlous state of affairs the world faced on the weekend of 12 October.
But now policymakers must also deal with the consequences of the crisis on the real economy.
Few economists now doubt that even if we escape catastrophe in financial markets, we face unprecedented challenges in the real economy.
There is no doubt that the global economy is entering what will be one of the most painful periods in recent decades.
The coming year will be characterized by declining global growth and rising global unemployment.
The International Labour Organisation has estimated that the number of people who are unemployed worldwide could increase by 20 million to 210 million by late 2009. 
Even before the events of late September, the IMF had revised down its estimates of global growth.
The IMF predicted that:
“The world economy is now entering a major downturn ... and the major advanced economies are already in or close to recession.”  (IMF WEO)
The IMF has downgraded its global growth projections of the major advanced economies by 0.9 percentage points since July to 0.5 per cent in 2009.
The IMF is now forecasting growth in 2009 of less than 1 per cent in most of the G-7 economies. 
This will be the slowest rate of growth in the advanced economies for over a quarter of a century. 
And since that forecast was released, the UK economy has recently recorded a contraction of 0.5 per cent in the third quarter - the first quarterly contraction since 1992.
Policymakers around the world  -  most of whom have been immersed in the response to the financial crisis  -  must also now turn their attention to the emerging crisis in the real economy.
On Monday I received an email from the American economist, Jeffrey Sachs.
Sachs, together with other economists, is among the growing number of people looking beyond the current financial turmoil to the consequences for the global economy.
They recognize that just as we needed unprecedented coordinated global action to address the financial crisis, we will need unprecedented global action to address the coming global slowdown in the real economy.
There is an emerging global consensus that part of that action involves further monetary policy loosening through coordinated central bank interest rate cuts.
And further, that the world will also need to undertake a coordinated fiscal expansion. 
China and many Asian economies have the resources and the need to increase spending  -  to stimulate their economies and accelerate much needed investments in infrastructure and social spending.
Oil producing countries must look through the current slide in oil prices to use their wealth of reserves for productive long-term investments around the world.
The U.S. and Europe, despite their large budget deficits, would also be well served to support positive growth through appropriate fiscal expansion.
The challenge for policymakers is to ensure that fiscal expansion is coordinated across countries to boost the global economy  -  and that this does not occur too late.
And to ensure that a substantial part of this new spending is also used to fund productive investments which will make the global economy stronger into the future.
The fact is that the financial boom and the inflation of asset prices over the last decade has masked a slowdown in the real driver of prosperity  -  productivity growth.
And that brings us to the need globally and nationally to continue to prosecute a long term economic reform agenda to boost productivity growth.
During the 1960s, productivity growth in OECD economies peaked at an average annual rate of 4.7 per cent.  The 1950s and 1960s were a ‘golden age' of growth, development and productivity for western countries.
The most likely cause for rapid productivity growth in the 1950s and 1960s was the massive investment in technology during the war and in infrastructure during reconstruction.
Since the 1960s, productivity growth in OECD economies has been trending downwards.
In the 1990s, the transformative effect of investments in information technology drove strong productivity growth.
Since then productivity has been in decline  -  falling to an average annual rate of 1.7 per cent so far this decade. 
The current crisis is a painful reminder that - in the words of former US Treasury Secretary Larry Summers:
“Finance led growth is problematic.  The wealth and income gains from the easy availability of credit are highly concentrated in the hands of a fortunate few and the benefits are often temporary.” 
Financial innovation is not a substitute for productivity growth throughout the economy.
As RBA Governor Glenn Stevens noted last week, this crisis should teach us that the historical role of the finance sector is to be the “‘handmaiden of industry” rather than the master of industry.
Stevens is one of many economists calling for:
“a renewed focus on the processes in the real economy which generate growth in productivity.” 
In Australia, the Government has also acted ahead of the curve to support continued positive growth in the Australian economy.
Given what is happening around the world, this will be a tough challenge.
Australia has been one of the first governments to adjust our fiscal setting to the new global economic reality.
We were able to take early and strong action because of the prudent budget surplus we had accumulated this year.
That surplus was meant to be a buffer for tough times ahead.
And those tough times have arrived.
The Australian economy now needs stimulus.
Fiscal and monetary policy must now work together to strengthen the Australian economy.
Some of that support will come from the tax cuts, which came into effect in July.
Some will come from the 100 basis points cut in interest rates this month.
And some will come from the $10.4 billion Economic Security Strategy.
Through practical support for households and across the economy more broadly, we are supporting continued positive growth.
The elements of the package are:
     * a $4.8 billion down payment on long-term pension reform;
     * $3.9 billion in payments to help around 2 million families; and
     * doubling the first home buyers grant for the purchase of an established home to $14,000 and tripling it to $21,000 for those who buy a newly constructed home.
This package will provide a boost to families in need.
It will provide a boost to pensioners and carers.
It will provide a boost for the construction sector as well as helping families realise the dream of owning their own home.
The Government's Economic Security Strategy however goes beyond fiscal stimulus.
It also contains actions to deal with long-term productivity challenges by boosting training and bringing forward investment in infrastructure.
     * we have doubled the number of productivity training places to 113,000 in this financial year; and
     * we will be bringing forward the nation building agenda, with further announcements in December.
It is an Economic Security Strategy to see us over the short-term challenges and to position the economy to continue to grow in the long-term.
Through these policy measures, the Government is dealing with: the immediate challenges of financial stability; the subsequent challenges of economic stimulus; and the long term challenges of productivity growth.
This Government will not be in the business of pushing to one side the productivity agenda while we negotiate our way through the present crisis. 
As we argued throughout 2007, action on productivity is both urgent and overdue.
Throughout last year, this was the core of my argument for why Australia needed a new wave of economic reform and why we needed an education revolution.
Long-term prosperity is built through the hard work of building productivity growth.
With few exceptions, the nations that build and sustain the greatest wealth aren't the nations with the most resources.
They're the nations that use their resources to invest in their human and other productive capital to remain on the productivity frontier. 
Australian experience underscores that basic economic fact.
Treasury data shows that 80 per cent of the improvement in the living standards of Australians over our past 40 years has come from increased productivity.
The long-term economic challenge for Australia is the long-term decline in productivity, as the Reserve Bank Governor has noted.
During the productivity cycle of the mid-1990s, we averaged productivity growth of 3.3 per cent each year.
During the productivity cycle from 1998-99 to 2003-04, productivity growth fell to 2.1 per cent.
And in the current cycle since 2003-04, productivity growth has fallen further to just 1.1 per cent.
We cannot turn that around overnight.
There are long time lags between planting the seeds of future productivity growth, and reaping a harvest.
But the payoff of those reforms will endure for decades.
That is why we need to start today  -  to act ahead of the curve.
It's why the cooperation of State and Territory governments on the COAG agenda is so important.
It's why productivity defines the Government's core economic plan for Australia's long term economic future.
The Government's productivity agenda contains five parts:
     * the education revolution on skills, training and human capital formation;
     * a nation-building infrastructure plan;
     * innovation and growing the industries of a 21st century economy;
     * long-term tax reform; and
     * the COAG reform and deregulation agenda, where we are working on 27 priority areas to build a seamless national economy.
In our first year in office the Government has been prosecuting each item on this agenda.
And we have been informed along the way by our consultation with business  -  including the positive contributions of the BCA on productivity, on deregulation and infrastructure.
We kick-started the productivity agenda by establishing Infrastructure Australia earlier this year.
In response to the global financial market crisis, the Commonwealth agreed at the October COAG meeting to ask Infrastructure Australia to bring forward an interim report on the National Infrastructure Audit and the Infrastructure Priority List by the end of 2008.
In just eleven months of Government, we have committed to a multi-billion dollar infrastructure investment program, allocating funds for key priorities such as transport, communications, and social infrastructure.
We'll invest $26 billion in roads and rail infrastructure through 2008-09 to the end of AusLink II.
Over time we'll invest $20 billion through the Building Australia Fund in transport and communication priorities.
And from this, we'll invest almost $5 billion in a National Broadband Network.
Over time, we'll also invest $15 billion in education infrastructure, through the Education Investment Fund, Trade Training Centres in schools, computers in our classrooms, and by investing in our universities.
Over time, we'll invest $11 billion in health and hospitals infrastructure, through the Health and Hospitals Fund and other programs.
Through these investments, we will build the foundations of future prosperity as well as supporting economic activity during a time of global uncertainty.
In recent days there has been conjecture  -  here and internationally  -  about the implications of the global financial crisis for climate change policy.
Some have said that the financial crisis means that the Australian Government should postpone acting on climate change.
The Government does not share that view.
And the Treasury modelling of the costs of acting on climate change  -  which we released this morning  -  does not support this view.
The modelling shows that Australia and the world will continue to grow strongly over the long term  -  and that growth is only slightly trimmed in responding to climate change.  The modelling also shows that robust growth in real household incomes should continue while we reduce the carbon intensity of our economy.
The modelling also shows that action pays dividends.  Those countries that begin structural change earlier will have a head start.
They will have more time to adjust their infrastructure and industrial structure smoothly for a carbon constrained world, avoiding more disruptive change later.
Such countries will be able take full advantage of the emerging growth opportunities.
The International Energy Agency has estimated that to halve global emissions by 2050 will need additional investment globally of US$45 trillion.
The business community has said that they look to the Government for certainty.
Far from assisting industry, deferring climate change policy action would fuel uncertainty in the investment outlook  -  particularly in the energy sector.
It is important to remind ourselves of the original case for action on climate change.
We know from the work of Professor Ross Garnaut that the costs of inaction are high.
Garnaut showed that if we do not address climate change, we face a rapidly increasing negative impact on wages and output.
Taking responsible, co-ordinated action in Australia and globally will insure us against severe and possibly catastrophic consequences for our material wellbeing during this century.
And it will help to avoid damage to Australia's environmental assets.
We also know that there are international risks from not acting responsibly.
We need to be aware of the potential for unilateral and protectionist action, ostensibly in pursuit of climate goals. There are live proposals for border tariffs in a range of major economies.
For that reason, we must set also act responsibly.
In light of global financial instability, it is also worth reiterating some features in the Government's Green Paper proposals for the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme.
We proposed in the Green Paper that businesses can access international carbon credits to meet their obligations under the scheme.  That feature is likely to reduce the cost of the scheme in Australia, given the availability of lower-cost emission reduction opportunities overseas.
We have also committed to allocating a significant share of free permits for those industries which face challenges to their competitiveness during the transition period until a comprehensive international agreement is in place.  The Treasury modelling finds that this proposal significantly eases their transition to a low-carbon economy.
We will continue to progress this important reform in a careful and methodical way, taking into account the needs of households and industries as we do so. 
Our policy response will promote clarity and predictability for industry. 
Only that kind of response will provide a firm foundation for investment and job creation in the future.
The alternative  -  i.e. to keep deferring the decision, as our political opponents have done for years  -  is to continue to promote uncertainty in the investment environment.
The challenge of climate change is no less real today than it was before the financial crisis.  Addressing climate change is part of laying the foundations for long-term economic growth.
While we recognise that climate change, productivity and the global financial architecture are critical and urgent problems, we have to acknowledge that for the most disadvantaged in Australia they may seem remote, academic and of little practical relevance to their daily lives. 
In particular, too many Indigenous Australians face disadvantages arising from the neglect and policy failures of past governments.  We cannot allow their situation to continue unaddressed.
As Greg has just said, yes, we must focus on urgent challenges like the global financial crisis, but we must not lose sight of what's also important in the long-term, like closing the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.
Like many of the challenges we face as a nation, Government cannot close the gap alone.
Everyone  -  the corporate world, the non government sector, Indigenous communities  -  has a part to play. 
That's why the BCA's announcement tonight is a positive development.  It tells the country and Indigenous Australians in particular, that the corporate sector is collectively buying into this national challenge.
The Government has outlined its closing the gap priorities:
     * to close the seventeen year gap in life expectancy within a generation;
     * to halve the gap in mortality rates for Indigenous children under five within a decade; 
     * to ensure all Indigenous four years olds in remote communities have access to early childhood education within five years;
     * to halve the gap in reading, writing and numeracy achievements for Indigenous children within a decade;
     * to halve the gap for Indigenous students in year 12 attainment or equivalent attainment rates by 2020; and
     * to halve the gap in employment outcomes between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians within a decade.
To harness the unprecedented goodwill following the Apology we are developing a strategy for business action to encourage corporate partnerships  in the following core areas:
Jobs - The basic building block for building personal wealth, establishing financial independence and interacting with the community
Education and training  -  To ensure that individuals are fully equipped for a life of success in learning and employment
Sports, arts and recreation  -  Those everyday community activities that give life meaning, and which most Australians love
Governance and community development  -  Helping organisations and communities to better manage their social and economic development
Economic development  -  to ensure that everyone has the opportunity to share in the prosperity of the nation
I want to recognise the efforts of many of your members who are already doing extraordinary work to help close the gap in Indigenous disadvantage.
For example the National Australia Bank's initiative to expand its not-for-profit business opportunity loans and microenterprise loans program. 
BHP Billiton has, since 1996, participated in Reconciliation Australia's Reconciliation Action Plan program which has seen the company provide education, employment and training to Indigenous Australians as well as involving Indigenous businesses in their supply chain.
The results speak for themselves.
BHP has 10 contracts with Indigenous businesses worth an estimated $350 million and an Indigneous workforce of around 10 per cent in its iron ore operations in West Australia.
Earlier today I launched the Australian Employment Covenant, led by Andrew Forrest, to create 50,000 new Indigenous jobs. 
One of the Covenant's strengths is its focus on industry and private sector employers as the drivers for change  -  but the Government is committed to supporting the Covenant through:
         * coordinating training to the appropriate job standards of the employing industry;
         * ensuring Government services support the take up of AEC jobs by eligible Indigenous job seekers; and
         * facilitating ongoing support for employees.
Both the BCA's announcement tonight and the AEC announcement earlier today, along with the existing work of major corporations like NAB and BHP, are exemplars of the kind of business action the Government wants to encourage.
As another example of businesses working with government to tackle Indigenous disadvantage, we have an array of organisations providing exceptional scholarship programs for Indigenous kids. In July this year Macquarie Bank committed $2.6 million for a further three year's funding for the Higher Expectations Program which offers scholarships for Cape York children to study at our best boarding schools.
Tonight I am delighted to announce the Australian Government will be working with the newly formed Australian Indigenous Education Foundation (AIEF) to improve the educational outcomes of young Indigenous people around Australia.
One of AIEF's key strategies is to provide scholarships for Indigenous secondary school students from rural and remote areas to attend boarding schools in major cities around Australia.
Secondary school options for many Indigenous students, particularly in remote areas, can be limited.  This initiative will provide families with the choice of sending their child to a high-performing secondary school, which will bring with it access to quality learning environments and educational opportunities that might not otherwise be available.
In order to achieve these outcomes, the Government will provide $20 million over three years, starting next financial year, and AIEF has agreed to raise at least this much again in matching funding from business. 
These monies will be invested in an endowment fund, and combined with investment revenues, will provide up to 2,000 six-year scholarships over the next two decades.
These scholarships of up to six years will cover tuition and boarding fees, and any other expenses that families might not be able to meet, such as uniforms and sporting equipment.
AIEF is the product of a strong existing partnership with Australian business.
The Commonwealth Bank and the Tenix Foundation are major foundation investors in AIEF, having also been major supporters of the St Joseph's College Indigenous Fund since its inception several years ago. 
Andrew Penfold from AIEF who is with us tonight will be moving through the audience later to expand that base of support to help achieve the organisation's ambitious target of $20 million to match our investment in the education futures of Indigenous kids.
The Government will continue to act decisively on the challenges we face today and the challenges we face for the future. 
We are acting at home and in cooperation with our partners abroad on the immediate challenge of financial stability.
We are acting ahead of the curve to strengthen the Australian economy in the face of the coming global recession which threatens growth and jobs.
We are acting on the medium term challenge to improve Australia's productivity performance.
We are continuing to respond to the long term challenge of climate change.
And we remain determined to act on the enduring challenge of indigenous disadvantage.
The business sector plays a valuable role in helping Australia to meet these challenges. 
I am confident that together we can overcome these challenges. 
We are a people not given to panic.
We are by instinct a people given to productive action.
To deal with challenges as they arise.
And to chart a strategy through those challenges.
This government is of the same mind.
This government is resolved to take whatever action is necessary in the unchartered waters that lie ahead  -  to see Australia through.


Opening this centre today symbolises one of the great traits of Australians and that trait is resilience.
Beaconsfield's history is full of great achievements, some setbacks and always the strength of a people, a local people and a local community of always fighting back.
The opening of the Beaconsfield Mine and Heritage Centre today demonstrates that the people of this town are proud of their past and equally optimistic about their future.
And I would like to personally congratulate each and every one of you as members of this community, who have rallied behind this great cause.
Like many towns in Australia, mining was the reason Beaconsfield grew into a regional centre in the 19th century.
More than 130 years ago when gold was discovered here in 1877, miners looked for work as the gold rush on the big island to the north had passed its peak and then they came to Beaconsfield, on the big island in the south.
And Beaconsfield really took off when underground mining began here in 1879. The mine at the time was one of the most advanced in the world. The investors had put up their money because of the richness of the great reef of gold discovered deep underground.
I understand that the Tasmania Reef is still regarded as the best in Australia and possibly the world.
The Hart Shaft, the Main Shaft and the Grubb Shaft that were sunk in the 19th century brought employment and prosperity to this town and to this region.
Beaconsfield became the highest yielding gold mine in Tasmania.
But in 1914 operations ceased.
Despite using state-of-the-art equipment, the flooding in the mine shafts could not be stopped and the mine was abandoned.
It was a blow, a cruel blow to the town. The main industry was shutdown.
And the town felt the impact.
Jobs were lost.
People moved away.
But the town still kept growing.
For more than 70 years Beaconsfield kept going without a mining industry.
In that 70 years there were two world wars.
The great Depression came and went.
Australia continued to grow and develop as did this community here in Beaconsfield.
And then in the 1970s, prospectors realised that there was even more gold in the reef than previously thought.
A combination of more gold and better technology meant that the mine could be re-opened.
Once again, gold mining became the main industry of this town.
The work was, and is as the nation now knows all to well, dangerous work. Difficult and dangerous work. Difficult, hard and dangerous work.
The economic impact of mining on the town was clear  -  just as it had been back in the 19th century.
And once again the ore came out of the ground.
In 2006, the mine was still producing gold.
The gold price was high.
Things were going well in Beaconsfield.
But in April of 2006 the reality of the danger of this business was brought home to us all.
On ANZAC Day there was a collapse in the mine.
Larry Knight tragically lost his life that day.
And Brant and Todd were trapped underground for weeks, their families waited.
For two weeks, the whole nation watched Beaconsfield.
For two weeks the whole nation waited on Beaconsfield.
For two weeks the whole nation prayed for Beaconsfield.
And we all know every detail of the rescue efforts that followed.
For the people of Beaconsfield, for the miners and their families this was more than a story on television.
This was life in their community, life in your community, it was your community.
And the remarkable thing, the great thing, the truly wonderful thing is that this community pulled together.
Everyone threw themselves into the rescue effort.
The miners in the rescue teams doing whatever they could to rescue their mates.
The community coming together to support the families and hold vigils.
The CWA providing meals.
All the emergency workers and volunteers doing what they could to support the rescue teams.
The mine management and the Australian Workers Union, led by Bill Shorten working together in the best Australian way, working together.
It was a true example of what makes this country such a great country.
Because whether it is a bushfire or a flood or a mining tragedy, when we are faced with trials, when we are faced with tragedy, our instinct is to pull together, it is a great Australian trait of character.
Australians  -  particularly those in smaller communities  -  always pull together at times like that.
This was a terrible tragedy that Larry Knight lost his life and let us pause to reflect on his life.
This was a terrible ordeal for Brant, for Todd and their families, an ordeal that they came through.
And this was a terrible time that left Beaconsfield facing new challenges  -  uncertainty about the future of the mine, uncertainty again about the future of the town.
But the town of Beaconsfield has not only survived, it's bounced back.
I acknowledge the decision of the previous Commonwealth Government in providing $8 million to the Beaconsfield Community Trust, this was a good decision. It was a decision which we happily supported and which we happily continue to support.
This fund has in part supported this project that we are here today to celebrate.
You know Beaconsfield has a lot to be proud of in its history.
And the new centre that is being opened today brings that history to life.
At the same time the new centre is also about the future, because gold mining is not the only industry in this town.
Tourism has become a major industry in north-eastern Tasmania.
And the tourists come here to appreciate this wonderful of Australia's natural beauty, they come here to appreciate the local history and they come here to appreciate the fine food and your even finer wine and it's terrific.
This centre will help support this growing tourism industry in this great state of Tasmania.
You know I grew up in a small town a bit like this in rural and regional Queensland - population of 162 was the town a grew up in, called Eumundi.
It was a fantastic place to grow up in, a real sense of local community.
And that is what many of us who have come here, myself for the first time today but many of my friends and colleagues who have been here many times before tell me about this, your community as well.
A community with a history to be proud of. A community that has risen to the challenges that have come its ways and critically overcome those challenges.
And a community, therefore with a great future ahead of it.
And it is this sense of community - and let me say this to the nation at large today  -  it is this sense of community, this real sense of community, a real sense of looking after one another that will help see our nation through the challenging times that lie ahead of us now.
This spirit that we saw alive and we see alive in Beaconsfield.
It is therefore ladies and gentlemen with great pleasure and great pride that I participate today in the opening of the Beaconsfield Mine and Heritage Centre. 



Democracy is at work here today, it has been at work in the United States of America as well. 
If I could publicly acknowledge and congratulate the election of Senator Obama as the next President of the United States.
The great thing about Senator Obama was so much of his campaign was about hope.
It was about what we can do to change the world, what we can do together to tackle the great challenges the world faces together, the great global challenge of climate change. What we can do as a community of States, as a collection of peoples, as a organisation of States to act together on this great challenge.
And also the other great challenges of our age, including the global financial crisis.
But there is something more I think in Senator Obama's message.
It's so much about the inspiration from this individual himself and that is: this is a person who has come from an extraordinary background in American politics and risen to the highest elected office in that great American democracy.
I think he speaks as an inspiration in terms of his own personal journey in addition to his message of hope to the world.
We wish him well, we wish him god speed.
This is a great challenge he faces for us all.


On the 13th of November in 1972 at the Blacktown Civic Centre, Gough Whitlam, having paused momentarily to touch Graham Freudenberg on the shoulder, walked on to the stage and uttered the words ‘Men and Women of Australia'.
These are words that continue to stir the Australian soul. They continue to lift our spirit, they continue to spur us to action because within the cadence of these few words and of the poetry and the prose that followed, we were animated towards hope.
Hope that the Australian political project could be something more than the tawdry accretion of greed and self interest.
Every Australian of a certain age and certainly everyone here remembers the optimism and the hope that that moment generated. As well as the suspense which then ensued. Could our hopes and our dreams of a better world, of a fairer world, of a more prosperous world for all and not just for some, be made into a reality?
Or was it instead all cruel illusion as the conservatives and their singularly dismal political project would always have us believe. The answer is as follows: that the prospect of measurable human progress, of social progress, of economic progress, of political progress does lie within our political reach.
It does lie within our political power so long as our political resolve remains firm. For were it not so, and were the conservatives instead right for the century or more history now of our federation, then why is it that we have things called an aged pension? Why is it that we have things called workers compensation?
Why is it that we have things called the Racial Discrimination Act? Why is it that we have universal education? Why is it that we have universal health insurance? For if the conservatives were right and this was all a matter of cruel illusion, none of these things would have changed. And they have and they have been achieved through the agency of progressive politics.
You see, in the history of this nation, it has invariably fallen to us to be the builders and to them to be the ones that tear down. We seek to unite, they seek to divide. We seek to include, they often seek to exclude.
Our position, our project, our prospect is a project of positive hope; theirs often constructed on the basis of negative fear.
There was an exchange recently, unreported and unremarked on in the House of Representatives, where in what I thought was light-hearted banter with a colleague of mine on the other side of the House, I asked this question, half rhetorically, half seriously, ‘What is it that unites the Liberal Party?'
The answer from the manager of opposition business was ‘what unites the Liberal party is our hatred of the Labor party'.
Therein lies more than a kernel of truth. Ours is a positive project; theirs, the reverse. And on days such as this, it is important to reflect on that core continuing kernel of truth which underpins so much of the divide in Australian politics this last century. And that of course brings us back to Whitlam.
It brings us back to the period in which Whitlam was in power - cut short, those two years and 11 months of Government ushered in a period of progressive change that despite their desperation and determination to do so, the conservatives more than 35 years later have never managed to demolish.
I want you to think of those achievements for just a moment. The transformation of education in Australia, of which I am one beneficiary. I am the product of a Whitlam education. Were it not for Whitlam's education reforms, I doubt that I would have ever darkened the doors of a university. For which Gough, I thank you.
The creation of a national health insurance scheme. The focus on Indigenous Australians. The focus on urban development and the future of our cities. And the change that caught my attention as an earnest teenager in the backblocks of Queensland, the recognition of China and the great helmsman's wider engagement of Asia.
If you reflect on each of those achievements and their impact over time, what is clear about all of them was that EG Whitlam was ahead of his time, well ahead of his time. Or, to use the word of our time, ahead of the curve, well ahead of the curve.
Gough Whitlam woke Australians from a long, long slumber and doze that were the Menzies period. And Gough Whitlam fulfils so much of the promise he set out in that great speech at his campaign launch in November of 1972.
But just here I am getting a little ahead of myself because Gough's speech and the program it set out is the point at which Jenny Hocking's momentous new biography ends, and this in fact is the book's great strength.
It lets us see who Gough Whitlam the person was before he became Gough Whitlam the politician. And how this progressive agenda was in fact formed. We learn a lot along the way through the pages of this biography. And could I say it is an elegantly written and elegantly crafted biography.
Some of what we discover is surprising, like the fact that Gough is a member of that peculiar elite segment of Australian society, the convict aristocracy - his great grandfather having been jailed for forgery. A more elevated form of the felony of the petty theft that my own convict forebears were sent down for. But then again, the Whitlams were always a cut above the rest.
And the fact that he comes from a long line of what he himself is affectionately referred to from time to time as ‘Bible-bashing bastards'. Sin and salvation, those hardy perennials of the universal human story, and of the story of this land, Australia.
Some of the book's revelations of course, are less surprising. Like the story of how his mother, finding her toddler Gough sobbing in her room, asking him what was the matter, only to be told that he'd just learned that Persephone, daughter of Zeus, wife of Hades and queen of the underworld, had been taken away from her parents - and that made him very sad.
You might say in a normal Australian household, toddlers may become saddened by a perhaps the loss of a ball, or someone stole my blocks. Only a toddler like Gough could have been saddened by the unfortunate twists of Greek mythology. But therein lies the man.
And then there's the revelation that while the baby Gough was slow to speak, when he did he not only skipped baby talk but spoke in complete sentences, presumably in the active voice, with a subject, an object, a verb and where appropriate, Latin declensions. And remarkably, all this occurring before Graham Freudenberg was even born! And the many linguistic adornments that Graham would later provide, to our own, our very own Pericles.
Imagine had Gough, with his adoration of classical languages, had been born a Catholic. A career in the Roman Curia would have been almost inevitable. Culminating at least in the red cap if not going all the way to the white.
That will get me into strife too.
As this precocious youth became a man, Jenny's book chronicles how his world outlook was also formed. This is where this biography comes into its own. It points out the importance of growing up in Canberra and the connections of his father, the Commonwealth solicitor-general, to his belief in potentialities of National Government and what National Government could do in the nation's interest.
And the profound influence of his war service. One day would find him navigating his Ventura bomber through the Japanese flak over Timor and the next would find him agitating with his squadron leader for support for the 1944 war powers referendum, resolving that the war when it ended must usher in a better world.
These are genuine renaissance qualities, here in the Antipodes, the art of war and the even more taxing art of constructing the peace. Jenny Hockings' book describes in detail how those war time experiences led Gough to the great political theme that became known as Whitlamism. His associations with the people of Gove and Cooktown had contributed to the development of his understanding of the needs of indigenous Australians. His contact with New Guinea, Indonesia and the Philippines which gave him his first insights into the need to put the fading colonial empires in our region out of their misery once and for all. And his deep admiration for the Curtin Government and its efforts to extend Commonwealth powers for the task of post war reconstruction which made him a lifelong constitutional reformer.
Most of all, beyond all these particular projects, we get a sense of how that war time experience gave him courage, audacity and determination. Crash through or crash, these are qualities of character and those qualities of character have served this leader well.
When you have flown through anti aircraft fire scanning the skies anxiously for marauding Zeroes and guided your bullet-riddled plane back to the tiny remote airstrip on only one engine, taking on the sectarian culture of Arthur Calwell, Eddie Ward and the Victorian Trade Union Defence Committee look like a walk in the grass. Probably these things did not hold many terrors for E G Whitlam.
So Gough took on the big fights within our party, fights which have been forgotten by many but which are in the record. Big fights over the US alliance, State aid for schools, the White Australia policy and in each of these fights, in each of these great policy debates Gough Whitlam prevailed.
The end product of this journey through war and peace was the fashioning of a political style and a policy program characterised by unbounded optimism, unbounded passion for the progressive political project and an absolute fearlessness in assaulting the citadels of conservative political power.
As he said: “Nostalgia should beset conservatives, not socialists.” Or put differently the central organising principle of our political project, the progressive political project, should always be the future not the past.
Gough Whitlam's ideas were based not on left or right but on the essential ideas of progress, a progress based on a deep intellectual immersion in the Labor reformist tradition. He took the kernel of what wartime Labor stood for under Curtin and Chifley, social equality and national progress, and fashioned a program for a new Australia for the half century that followed the war.
Jim Cairns once asked about Gough: “Whose party is it; his or ours?”
The answer of course is that following his conflict with the faceless men it became his party and through that once again it became our party rather than the party of self appointed oligarchs.
Over the decades since 1975 there has been a great debate about the Whitlam legacy. None of us are perfect, although Gough in his own modest world view gives it a good go.
Gough's legacy on legal reform, on social reform and on our place in the world has stood the test of time. Reforms like expanded educational opportunity, a quality public health system, funding the basic infrastructure needed for the future of our cities, our engagement with Asia and enhancing and not undermining the role of the United Nations.
When Gough made that great speech at the Blacktown Civic Centre on the 30 November 1972, those first words ‘Men and women of Australia' were the words originally of John Curtin. Gough took them and gave them new life, new life for a new era. Utilising the full capacity of our constitution and our national political arrangements to bring about progressive change, not to dream about it, not to think about it but to bring it about.
Today we continue that tradition, through a new era of national reform. An education revolution from early childhood education to universities, with the single unifying ambition which goes back to Whitlam's time of turning Australia into the best educated country anywhere in the world.
A new nation building agenda - this time built around the infrastructure of the 21st Century, a new national broadband network. Ratifying Kyoto and implementing a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme so that we can act together to save the planet. An Apology to indigenous Australians and a national reform agenda to close the gap. A foreign policy agenda to act on disarmament, to build an Asia Pacific community and to engage in the creative diplomacy of progressive middle powers in building a more resilient international order for the future. One capable of dealing effectively with the global financial crisis, with the global financial system, with the global challenge that is climate change and with the great challenge and opportunity represented by the rise of China and the dawn of this the Asia Pacific century.
These are the challenges which now lie ahead of us, these are the challenges to which this reformist Government is committed to addressing.
And for Australia that will mean building the closest possible partnership with the United States under this new Obama administration, the closest possible partnership.
Our alliance with the United States is not the preserve of any individual political party. Constructed and formed and shaped under 12 American Presidents and 13 Australian Prime Ministers over many decades, Labor and Liberal, Republican and Democrat. It is not the political property of any single political party and that's why it has been wrong for one political party in Australia to - from time to time - have seen it in their political advantage to attack a candidate for the Presidency of the United States. Let us hope that error is not committed again in the future, it is not in our national interest that it should ever occur again.
Barack Obama spoke of hope, hope for America and hope for the world. The challenges are great and we need to be inspired by hope and committed to a program of common action and this Government in Australia stands prepared to work with the incoming administration of the United States in dealing with these challenges of the global order. Fuelled by hope, fuelled also by a practical resolve to get real results for our common humanity.
Like Jenny Hockings' fine biography, can I just say this: that the reformist project is a task that's only just begun. I am personally looking forward very much reading the next volume of Gough's achievements for the Labor party in Australia.
For Labor as a party in progressive politics, ours by definition is always a work in progress.
It is my pleasure now to declare this biography officially launched and in so doing honouring Gough, honouring Margaret, honouring their children and their grandchildren and their wider family.
And importantly and some might think unusually but importantly given the scope of this great biography honouring also the family that gave Gough his nurture, the family that gave Gough his passion, the family that shaped his intellect and the young EG Whitlam growing up and in so doing prepared Gough Whitlam for his career in service to our nation Australia.


I begin by acknowledging the first Australians on whose land we meet and whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in the human history. 
When you say that, it still takes your breath away. It reflects I believe not just the extraordinary privilege we have in this country of having among us our indigenous brothers and sisters, but what parallels that is also the great responsibility which is our lot as well, an extraordinary thing, the oldest continuing cultures in human history and still among us here in this land we call Australia.
Tonight we honour a great Australian.
Tonight we celebrate the contribution to our nation of a great Australian.
Tonight we award the Sydney Peace Prize to Patrick Dodson.
Patrick has been called and rightly so “the father of reconciliation”.
The citation for his award of the Sydney Peace Prize reads, in part:
“For courageous advocacy of human rights, for distinguished leadership of the reconciliation movement and for a lifetime of commitment to peace and justice.”
These are great words and they describe a great man. Throughout his life  -  as a priest, as the inaugural chairman of the Council for Aboriginal Reconciliation and as a leader of the Lingiari Foundation  -  Patrick has worked to bring people together.
Through his deeds and his words, he has given us an example of what leadership can achieve, of what leadership can inspire and what leadership can all give us to hope for.
Hope is a precious commodity in life. Hope points to the possibilities of the future rather than simply being weighed down with the despair of the past.
In the United States we have seen the triumph of hope, we have seen the exuberant triumph of hope. The triumph of hope after some centuries of despair.
And with hope now forming the basis of a new program of policy for America, for the world and for the future.
Senator Obama now faces a mountain of expectation.
Senator Obama's story has become the inspiration of a nation and now he carries the aspiration of the world. A world hungry for solutions, a world tired of excuses.
But the world must give him time, because the global challenges we face are great, they are deep and they are broad.
But together as people of good will the great challenges of peace, the great challenges of our planet and its survival and the great challenge and the enduring challenge of a proper sharing of the resources of the earth  -  these challenges can be met and they can be overcome. That is the message of hope.
Patrick has dedicated his life to closing the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.
It is a goal that this government shares.
Closing the gap is a national priority, it is a national necessity. The gap itself is a national obscenity.
We must give Indigenous Australians hope, we must give Indigenous Australians the rational basis for hope, not pious promises but concrete programs of action to turn hope into reality, that is our charge.
Hope that Indigenous Australians can have the same opportunities for the future that the rest of Australia takes for granted.
We as a Government have set concrete targets.
     * halving the gap in infant mortality rates;
     * halving the gap in reading, writing and numeracy for children
     * halving the employment gap; and
     * Over the next generation: closing the 17 year gap in life expectancy  -  the obscenity of all obscenities.
And, in the next five years:
     * giving every Indigenous four year old in remote communities access to an early childhood education.
These are tough targets. And we will be attacked for not meeting them. But we are absolutely determined with every fibre of our being and every element of our political personality to have a go.
And do more than that - to summon forth the resources of the nation, both governments at all levels and with our corporate community and the community at large, to turn these targets into reality.
The alternative, which is not to set ourselves these goals to realise, is simply to wallow. To engage in a rolling seminar of national hand-wringing. I do not believe that is the stuff of which Australians are made. We identify a problem, we identify a path through a problem. We resolve to act. And then we act. And that is the course of action we propose for this enduring scourge on the nation's soul.
Achieving this, that is closing the gap, is a national imperative that will shape Australia's future. It will shape how we view ourselves, it will shape how the world views us. That is a sobering reality.
The national apology has been a necessary first step. But it is only a first step. And it was conceived as a first step to build a bridge called respect between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians. Because in the absence of respect for one human being and another, nothing, nothing can be achieved. Nothing of permanence, nothing that can endure. Nothing of substance.
To build a bridge of respect. A bridge built by doing the simplest, but at the same time the hardest of things. And that was simply to say ‘sorry'.
But in doing so, building a bridge to the future.
A bridge on which we can now join hands with confidence to forge a common future. That was our aspiration. That must be our destiny.
All Australians have a role in closing the gap.
The targets of which I spoke before form the basis of closing the gap and this in turn forms the basis of a major reform agenda that has put Indigenous Australians at the heart of this Government's agenda.
We are committed to some basic guiding principles in how we go about this.
First, evidence.
The Government's abiding determination is hard data  -  what actually works.
We're not interested in what is popular or what might be ideologically fashionable with the left or the right or the ups or the downs.
We're only interested in what gets results  -  hard results, measurable results, results that turn closing the gap from being a policy into a reality. That is the goal.
Second, we know that Indigenous Australians must be deeply engaged in developing the solutions.
Otherwise the solutions simply will not work. They will exist on paper. They will be the stuff of seminars, the rolling national seminar of enduring national hand-wringing of which I spoke before.
What we need instead is deep engagement on the part of our indigenous leadership with the nation's leadership.
An engagement based on mutual respect and mutual responsibility.
In all of this, indigenous leadership is fundamental. And we know that efforts to rebuild indigenous communities won't get far unless indigenous leaders themselves drive this change. That's why tonight is so important.
Because we are recognising, and together we are honouring, an Australian leader.
A leader for Indigenous Australians, a leader for non-Indigenous Australians. A leader for all Australians.
Patrick Dodson is a bridge builder. He has been fundamental in moving the nation forward to a new phase of Indigenous and non-Indigenous relations.
He's a man who understands the past, but a man who is focussed on the future.
Someone who understands the importance of the cultural ties that bind. A true Australian leader. A man of forthright views. A man of plain speaking. Sometimes exceptionally plain speaking, Patrick. But we forgive you for that, we understand the reason why. And we respect you for it. Because these are the signs of the strength of leadership.
We are determined as the government to find more ways of supporting and nurturing indigenous leadership. Leadership from elders, leadership from young people, leadership from women, leadership from men, leadership in the most remote communities. Leadership in regional communities, leadership across our urban communities.
A starting point, of course, is forging new approaches in Indigenous education.
Because education is the key to expanding young people's life chances.
And a decent education means real choices about life and work opportunities.
It means new pathways to employment and higher living standards.
A decent education is the most powerful antidote to disadvantage that there can ever be.
And a decent education also helps to develop community leaders.
We are also working with dedicated teachers in local schools in remote communities who are working hard to turn around school attendance and improve student achievement.
Teachers however, do more than provide an education.
They inspire their students. They help to develop the next generation of leaders.
And that's why teachers are so important. They are the unsung heroes of the nation.
They have the nation's future in their hands and that is so much more the case in the Indigenous communities of Australia as well.
And that is why our teachers deserve our absolute support and our absolute respect.
A decent education can transform children's lives.
Take Patrick Dodson's own story.
A student first at local schools in the Northern Territory, and later a boarder and school captain at Monivae College in Victoria, Patrick Dodson is the embodiment of the power of education. And its forceful link to leadership.
Of course, education is part, but unless we move also on health and on housing and then cross the entire spectrum of reform, our targets of closing the gap will not be realised. That's why we must advance on all fronts and advance together in partnership with the Indigenous leadership of our nation.
Employment is important. We are reforming the Universal Employment Service program and indigenous employment programs to give Indigenous people the skills and training they need to get and to keep a job.
We are also developing a business action agenda to harness the commitment and will of the corporate sector to help close the gap.
Last week here in Sydney I helped launch the Australian Employment Covenant, a major private sector initiative driven by Andrew Forrest to create 50,000 jobs for Indigenous Australians.
Once again, this will be hard to do. It is easy to say, it is much harder to do. But if I experience one thing as we launched that Aboriginal and Australian Employment Covenant last week, it was this: the resolve of the corporate leadership of the nation to again end the hand wringing and get on with the business of creating jobs and permanent jobs for indigenous Australians across the country.
We see this in the corporate community. We see this in the education community. We see this in our sporting community. We see an extraordinary spirit across the entire breadth of the Australian community to take the spirit that was alive in the apology and to turn it into something new and good for our nation.
Much needs to be done and each of you in this great hall here in this great university in Sydney tonight have a role to play. And as you leave tonight I challenge you to reflect on what that role might be in your life.
A major and consistent thrust of Patrick Dodson's leadership has been to emphasise the importance of culture.
Culture and economics, tradition and jobs, these are not mutually exclusive propositions. They are mutually reinforcing propositions, seen correctly.
That is why we will begin the dialogue necessary to acknowledge the unique contribution of Indigenous Australians into our founding document, the Australian Constitution.
Closing the gap and respecting the inherent wealth of Indigenous cultures is a great national challenge and a great national opportunity.
And we all have a role to play  -  governments, Indigenous Australians, the corporate world, the community sector, the wider community. Each of us as individuals.
And it is a challenge that needs many more leaders to turn into reality, leaders of the calibre of Patrick Dodson.
A true leader, of whom all Australians can be proud.
We are here tonight to celebrate a peace prize, a Sydney Peace Price. On peace in this country, we often take that thing called peace for granted. But peace is much more than the absence of conflict.
Peace ultimately is the presence of justice. The presence of fairness, the presence of equity, the presence of opportunity, the presence of dignity. And therefore, for social justice to be realised, each and every one of us, animated in the deepest pit of our souls, must become warriors for justice, each of us.
Because in so doing we become warriors for peace.
Patrick, as Prime Minister of Australia I congratulate you on being the recipient of the 2008 Sydney Peace Prize.
It is a recognition of the leadership role you have played in our nation for many, many, many years. And as Prime Minister I am honoured to present you with this, the 2008 Sydney Peace Prize.


First of all thank you very much Kim, our Industry Minister. He has just said some nice things about me, let me just make this very plain. 
This Minister is passionate about manufacturing and passionate about the Australian auto industry and I have got to say we would not be here today were it not for his deep engagement with each of you from industry, from the unions and from the associated research institutes across the nation - here in Melbourne, Adelaide, elsewhere and beyond.
So mate this is very much your work, I really appreciate it, you have been there with your sleeves rolled up.
You know there is a lot of gloom and doom out there, but on days like this what we are doing is, in the midst of a global financial crisis, rolling up our sleeves and coming out in support of Australian manufacturing and the Australian car industry for the future. That's why we are here.
At a time of global financial crisis the Government today takes further decisive action to support Australian industry, to support Australian jobs. Because we believe this industry has a future and a big future in Australia's economy of the 21st Century.
We take decisive action to build an internationally-competitive, green economy for the future.
Australia needs a green car industry that manufactures the fuel-efficient, low emission vehicles of the future and that creates the well-paid, highly-skilled green jobs of the future.
We do not have to choose between having a growing economy in the short term and a green economy in the medium to long term.
We can work effectively to develop both and that's a large part of what today's package is all about.
Australia must have the green industries and green jobs of the future.
I know in the United States some have advocated a ‘green recovery' achieved through investments in energy efficiency and renewable energy strategies.
One think tank in America  -  the Political Economy Research Institute  -  has estimated that there are two million jobs to be had in the US through a green recovery.
I believe that Australia needs green investment as well.
And the automotive industry is critical to a green investment strategy for the nation.
The automotive industry is already a cornerstone of manufacturing.
Consider the numbers again, they command respect, more than 60,000 people employed directly in this industry. Altogether 200,000 Australians employed directly and indirectly in this industry.
Some $8 billion worth of Gross Domestic Product, $5.6 billion worth of exports, our largest manufacturing export and among our top 10 exports period and some 3,000-plus researchers working in the field.
This is a first class industry which demands support for the future. This industry is a powerhouse of exports and innovation and it's also part of the climate change challenge we face for the future as well.
Transport is responsible for 14 per cent of our nation's greenhouse gas emissions.
That means we need to transform the industry if we're going to improve our long term climate change performance.
As I indicated before more than 3 000 researchers and technicians are now working on new technologies.
We have seen some of that work here this morning as I walked around and spoke to the lads and the lasses from Deakin, from Monash, from our older established automotive parts industries and companies, the work that they are doing as well as our big three manufacturers and the extraordinary innovation which they are representing in their product lines for the future.
This is an exciting industry to be in and I believe it has an exciting future.
We will need literally thousands more Australians to become green car workers if we are going to transform the industry for the long term future.
We won't transform this industry by a combination of slogans or ideology.
What we need is innovative industry. We need a supply chain working together. We will need a supportive policy framework. We also need an automotive industry vision.
And that's why I am here today to launch a New Car Plan for a Green Future for Australia.
Before going onto the detail of today's announcement, it is worth us understanding the unique economic times in which we live.
We currently have the worst economic conditions in the global economy for many, many, many decades. We have the worst financial crisis since the great depression.
Since the global financial crisis began, more than 25 banks around the world have failed or have been bailed out.
The US and Europe are on the verge of recession. Growth in China has been slowing dramatically.
The Australian economy is sound but we will not be immune from the impacts of the global financial crisis.
There are no easy solutions and no quick fixes to this Global Financial Crisis.
But it is important to have a rational grounds for confidence in the future and this industry, the auto industry is part of that future and part of the reason why we should remain confident about our future.
This is going to be a long, drawn out crisis which will have a real impact in Australia.
There will be slowdown, there will be increased unemployment.
The Government has already taken decisive action and early action to protect the economy and all Australians during this crisis.
     * We have guaranteed bank deposits
     * We injected $10.4 billion into the economy to stimulate growth through our economic security strategy
     * We will bring forward major investment in infrastructure, in roads, rail, ports and boost economic activity in these critical areas that our economy will need for the future.
     * And we are investing in the capital needs for our education system and our hospital system as well.
These are all part and parcel of our economic strategy to see Australia through these tough economic times, driven by the global financial crisis.
The next step in our response to the global financial crisis is to build the low-emission, green economy of the future.
By implementing a green investment strategy today, we can transform our industry and create green jobs for tomorrow.
Today, at this the Cooperative Research Centre for Advanced Automotive Technology, we have a ‘Green Car Showcase'.
It is a window into the future of the automotive industry and a window into the future of our economy.
It's a future in which we should have absolute confidence - fuel-efficiency technologies, low-emission technologies, better designed and safer vehicles.
By creating these technologies and using them to manufacture vehicles in Australia, we can have the green car industry of the future. And we can be world leaders in this.
Getting there won't be easy  -  it will be hard.
That's why we're here as the Government, in order for us to go forward together arm in arm. This must be a partnership between Government, our researchers, business, industry, unions, workers, apprentices - a national effort in support of an important national industry.
If you think of how hard this country has worked to build the automotive industry we have today, it gives us real hope of what we can build with a green automotive industry for tomorrow.
Here is an important fact which all those less familiar with the industry should focus on: Australia is one of only about 15 nations in the world today that can create a motor vehicle from scratch  -  taking it from the drawing board through to the showroom floor. One of only 15 nations in the world.
The 60 years since the first 48-215 Holden came off the production line in 1948 have seen dramatic changes in automotive technology, in the structure of the industry and in the way in which we design industry policy.
In Australia, we've abandoned economic protectionism as a plank of industry policy. Tariffs and quotas are no longer industry policy levers. We've embraced international competition. But through the Button car plan of the Hawke Government we had the policy foundation for the industry to survive and to prosper. We intend to continue on that path.
Today, the Australian automotive industry faces a whole new set of market, economic and environmental changes and challenges.
The domestic market for cars has become more fragmented. Australian car makers do battle in a very crowded field with 60 other car brands. Consumer preferences have shifted away from family sedans to both smaller vehicles on the one hand and four wheel drives on the other.
Higher petrol prices have driven expectations of more fuel efficient vehicles  -  for smaller cars, but also more fuel-efficient medium and large vehicles as well.
Competition from regional players has become intense. Up until a couple of months ago, the exchange rate was at levels that made exporting very difficult. It's true that the recent exchange rate depreciation improves the prospect of the automotive export industry.
But it's hardly a welcome development when it's associated with a global financial crisis that is hammering the parent companies of local manufacturers; restricting access to credit from auto finance companies; and plunging the global economy into a recession.
The sector is also at the epicentre of the long term challenge of climate change. The industry knows that the transport sector produces 80 mega tonnes of carbon dioxide emissions every year. That is 14 per cent, as I said before, of Australia's annual greenhouse emissions.
Between 1990 and 2006, transport emissions grew by over a quarter.
We clearly have to turn these trends around if we are going to tackle climate change. The automotive industry has a key role to play responding to climate change.
The industry must reduce vehicle emissions by producing smaller, lighter, and more fuel efficient vehicles that produce fewer greenhouse gas emissions.
Faced with this complicated set of industry challenges  -  markets, economies, and the environment  -  some might say it's not worth trying to have a car industry. That is not my view. It is not the view of the Australian Government and it never will be the view of any Government which I lead.
I don't believe that car making is yesterday's business, or something better left to the Germans and Japanese. But I also don't believe that industry policy is about ‘saving' the automotive industry.
It's about helping to transform the industry to meet the challenges of the future. It is not about passive assistance. It is about active support for innovation and change.
That is why I say that in the 21st century, innovation policy is industry policy. Innovation policy is industry policy. They are the same thing for the economy of the future.
Let's again consider what is at stake with this important automotive industry.
This industry is worth almost $8 billion worth of value-added business.
64,000 directly employed, three-quarters of them in Victoria and South Australia, 3,000 researchers, technicians and other supporting staff in undertaking R&amp;D.
The auto industry also creates in other industries from iron, steel and rubber to mechanical repairs, wholesale trade and business services, many, many other jobs. An estimated 200,000 owe their jobs directly and indirectly to this industry.
In the future, the industry will have more ‘green car' jobs: manufacturing cleaner engines, fuel cells, and batteries; installing turbo-charging and direct-injection systems; designing lighter and more fuel efficient vehicles.
The Australian automotive industry already invests over $600 million a year in R&amp;D  -  and that will grow over time.
GM Holden has a regional design and engineering centre. Ford has a design and engineering ‘Centre of Excellence'.
Toyota's regional technical centre contributes to Toyota's global platforms.
Building the modern car integrates just about every advanced technology we use, from microchips to composite materials.
That is why the automotive sector is a cornerstone of Australian manufacturing, worth as I said before more than $5 billion a year in exports, making it one of our nation's top 10 export industries.
All this spill-over activity means that having an automotive industry makes economic sense for Australia.
Australia can enjoy the benefits of a prosperous automotive industry.
But it needs national policy vision. That is why today I am pleased to launch the Australian Government's New Car Plan for a Greener Future.
The New Car Plan for a Greener Future is a bold plan to transform the Australian car industry. Transformation so it can become more competitive.
Transformation so it is more responsive to changes in the pattern of consumer demand. Transformation so it's better equipped to respond to the challenge of climate change. And transformation so it is more integrated with global markets and supply chains.
The New Car Plan for a Green Future will ensure that car-making goes on contributing to Australia's prosperity in the future. The New Car Plan for a Greener Future is a 13-year, $6.2 billion automotive industry vision.
It is about strengthening the economy against the global economic downturn.
It is about creating the new green jobs for the future. The New Car Plan for a Greener Future has at its core, competitive, fuel-efficient, low-emissions vehicles, produced right here in Australia.
The centrepiece of our plan is an expanded and extended Green Car Innovation Fund. The Green Car Innovation Fund is now a 10-year, $1.3 billion initiative.
It will foster investment in research and development and plant and equipment for green vehicle technologies.
The Green Car Innovation Fund will be brought forward to operate from 2009 so we can start work on the cars of tomorrow today. That is what we are on about, sleeves rolled up, getting on with the job and getting on with it now.
Through an average 1:3 co-investment ratio, the Green Car Innovation Fund will generate over $5 billion in investment over the next 10 years.
Second, we will invest $3.4 billion between now and 2020 in a new Automotive Transformation Scheme.
Through this scheme we will co-invest in industry research and development on a 1:2 basis and in new plant and equipment on a roughly 1:7 basis.
The scheme provides investment certainty for the sector and improves the industry's competitiveness long term. This scheme is designed to help the industry reinvent itself. The Automotive Transformation Scheme will generate at least $12 billion in investment by 2020.
$12 billion for the Automotive Transformation scheme and an additional $4 - $5 billion from the Green Car Innovation Fund. $16 to $17 billion in investment in the future, that's why the Government is in this industry with you.
This is a massive investment for the future. We have also taken the policy decision to proceed with the cut in automotive tariffs from 10 per cent to five per cent in January 2010.
With this move Australia will have the third lowest tariff regime in the world amongst economies with a well developed automotive industry. This means cheaper cars for Australian motorists.
It is also a clear signal to overseas governments that our country believes in free trade. I don't believe we can or should shield our industry from free trade and open markets. I believe we must secure the industry's future with open markets through global integration and innovative capacity.
Our New Car Plan for a Greener Future also recognises that there are substantial pressures on the automotive supply chain. That is why we'll immediately establish from this month a $116 million structural adjustment program.
It will promote strategic consolidation to achieve scale economies and productivity improvements.
It will also provide for labour market adjustment where, if appropriate, fair and reasonable assistance will be made available to employees made redundant through automotive restructuring.
The New Car Plan also includes: a $20 million program to help suppliers integrate into a complex global supply chain; $6.3 million investment in an enhanced market access program; a $10.5 million expansion of the LPG vehicle scheme that doubles payments to $2,000 to purchasers of new LPG vehicles.
We will also establish an Automotive Industry Innovation Council to provide high level advice on the sector's strategic direction. The Plan I am launching today is a strong endorsement of the recent review of the automotive industry by the panel led by Steve Bracks. And again I thank him for his work.
The work done by the review team laid the foundations for the policy package I am unveiling today. The New Car Plan for a Greener Future is the next step of decisive action being taken by this Government in the midst of this global financial crisis.
To support our economy during the global economic downturn. To support jobs in our economy during the global economic downturn. To build a green car industry and create the green car jobs for the future.
It is part of our green investment strategy, it is part of our manufacturing strategy. Both with an eye firmly fixed on the future and fixed on the future with confidence. This is decisive action today in order to build a great and prosperous industry for tomorrow.
I said before I became Prime Minister of Australia that I did not want to be Prime Minister of a country that did not manufacture any more. I meant it then, I mean it now and I mean it for the future.
It is with great pleasure therefore that I officially launch this great new green car plan for a greener future for Australia.


Fellow Australians, friends of Australia, Veterans of Australia 
90 years ago today, the great guns fell silent.
After fours years of bloodshed, the battlefields were silent.
Great empires had been broken.
Millions, millions lay dead.
Among them, sixty thousand Australian heroes whose final resting place will forever be foreign soil.
And then there were the wounded  -  a further one hundred and fifty thousand whose bodies and minds were to be forever scarred by the horrors of war.
And all this from a country of some four millions.
The scale of the carnage; the new ways of killing on an almost industrial scale; the tiny pieces of land over which so much blood was spilt; the sheer, stark horror of life and death in the trenches  -  made all peoples hope that this could never happen again.
It was called the War to End All Wars.
But we now know that it was not.
It was the First World War.
The League of Nations did not prevent a Second.
Barely a generation had passed before the killing began again.
This time on a mass scale that saw civilians too as the target of war.
Once again the years of destruction made victors and vanquished alike commit afresh to peace.
Once again an international institution was established to maintain the peace  -  once again representing the hopes and aspirations of all humankind.
But war has continued and the innocent continue to die.
Causing us all to ask, is war our permanent condition?
Must every generation go through war to be reminded why there should be no war?
Or can we dare to do something different, can we dare to think something different.
Not just to be informed from history.
But to learn from history.
We have all endured a most bloody century.
But let us resolve afresh at the dawn of this new century, this century of the Pacific, that this might just be a truly (inaudible) peaceful century.
Let us resolve afresh to build the habits of cooperation rather than to yield to the inevitability of conflict.
Let all peoples of goodwill resolve afresh for peace, resolve afresh a century free from the threat of nuclear war.
So that our world community can work with one heart and one mind for the great challenges of our age.
Of course tyranny cannot and can never be wished away with a pen.
Tyrants must always be confronted when all other options are exhausted.
And that means that the price of peace remains eternal vigilance.
That is why we need our men and women in uniform.
That is why we are proud of our men and women in uniform.
That is why we are proud of the 100,000 names etched in the walls of this great memorial.
We as a nation have paid a great price.
Think of the war which ended 90 years ago today.
Gallipoli  -  26,000 casualties.
Fromelles  -  5,500 Australian casualties.
Pozieres  -  nearly 7000 Australia casualties.
Bullecourt  -  7500 Australian casualties.
Ypres  -  38,000 Australian casualties.
Today these numbers are mind-numbing, they are horrific in their magnitude.
90 years ago the Australian troops on the Western Front were at the forefront of the fighting.
The Australian Corps played a critical role in the actions that helped bring about the end of the war.
They brought some of Australia's greatest victories.
They saw some of the greatest acts of heroism.
In August, led by Monash, the Australians attacked from Villers-Bretonneux and Hamel, fighting side-by-side with our Americans allies for the first time.
They drove back the enemy lines.
Ludendorff described it as “the black day of the German army”.
In September, Australian diggers fought at Peronne and Mont St Quentin.
In October, Australian troops of the Second Division broke through the Hindenburg Line at La Motte Farm and Mushroom Quarry.
And again they drove the enemy back.
This was the last engagement of the Australian troops in the war.
These victories helped to set the path for the Armistice to be signed in November.
They are part of the proud tradition of the Australian military, each one of them heroes of Australia and we honour them.
And today too we honour our friends and our allies who have been with us in the thick of battle.
Behind every name on the walls of this great memorial is a story.
The story of someone in uniform, someone who gave their conflict, a very human story, a very personal story, a story of a family and families changed forever.
The story of communities changed forever.
For the loss of one of their sons.
This great memorial, looking down this great avenue of heroes, honours them all.
As we as a nation honour them today.
It honours what they have achieved in the name of Australia.
And through honouring them, we remember them.
In the words of Charles Bean, in this memorial “Here is their spirit, in the heart of the land they loved.”
It is right that we honour the service and sacrifice of the fallen today.
It is right that we honour all those who have served.
And it is right that we remember today those who are still serving.
For there is no higher calling in Australia than to wear the uniform of Australia.
What is the message of this 90th Armistice Day?
I believe each of the fallen would say to us this, be forever vigilant and be equally unstinting in the preservation of the peace.
Today we remember those who fell.
We honour the contribution they have made to this great nation Australia.
We honour the contribution they have made to the world.
And we commit ourselves to upholding the values for which these Australians, these hundred thousands and more Australians who gave their lives in the service of this nation.
And we commit ourselves afresh to the great cause of peace.
We honour them. 


What is it about this extraordinary conflict which so animates the Australian mind and so animates the Australian soul? We are all shaped by our own experiences and I am no different to anyone else in this room.
What I remember as a small child growing up in a Queensland country town is being woken before dawn to go on the dawn Anzac day march. A town of barely 200 people, but a march well attended. And I always remember in the dim, very early morning light, hearing the gentle clink of medals. In those days, in those days, these were veterans of the war we speak about today.
As I reflect again on the experiences as a kid growing up and through the 70s and the 80s when ANZAC seemed to dim a little in the nation's imagination and the crowds became thinner for a bit. And then the crowds came back, and they keep coming back and they get stronger and stronger and they get bigger and bigger.
So I go back to the question that I asked, what it is about ANZAC, what is it about the First World War, what is it about the war to end all wars, what is it about Australia's national military experience which so moves the Australian mind and plumbs the depths of the Australian soul?
It is I think as I struggle to answer this question, made up of many things. It is in part the grand narrative of nations. Nations aligned through the concert of Europe deciding to go to war once again. It is in part about the grand narrative which is the failure of peace and the resort to war.
In part, in our own case, Australia, it is the sheer dimensions of the sign up. Volunteers from all over this country, this vast country of ours so thinly populated in those days and so thinly populated still.
Walking, riding, travelling, days, weeks on end in order to sign up. The dimensions of it, the size of the voluntary effort, volunteering for the cause. Then there is the dimensions of the odyssey. The travel, the distance. Here we are in our part of the world, embarked as a national force of volunteers to embark on a military campaign at the other end of the world and land on the shores of Turkey, the Ottoman Empire.
If you were a kid growing up in Bowral and of enlistment age, would it have crossed your mind as you went to school that you could in a year or two's time, be fighting in the trenches of the Dardanelles, in the trenches of the Western Front? Names that you could barely pronounce, let alone places you had ever been to, or with which you had any particular connection to or emotional attachment. The distance from here to there at a time when people did not travel as they travel today.
The other great part of why this war so sears the Australian historical imagination is the great divisions over conscription, the great debates which certainly tore asunder the party which John (Faulkner) and I represent today. A debate about conscription which tore asunder much of the nation.
But the other reason that I think this affects so much the nation's imagination and the nation's soul are the purely personal dimensions of this extraordinary feat of arms in this extraordinary chapter in human tragedy, because it is both those things.
If you look at the grave fields across the Western Front, thousands upon thousands of white crosses. And I don't know if you are like me but I always ask myself a question when I go to one of these cemeteries. What would this young man's life have been like? Killed in action, aged 19, what would have his life been like, how long would he have lived, what family would he have raised, who were the children who never knew him or the children he had he didn't know any further.
I think what partly animates our souls as Australians is the truly personal dimensions of this. What is wonderful about these national archives and the exhibition that we will see soon is each of those personal essays again come to life and that is what is so important.
Then there are the dimensions of the recovery. Sure 60,000 lie dead and we honour them as did yesterday. 150,000 who were wounded and who came back to try and piece together a shattered life, as John said a shell-shocked life, a life which could never be the same.
Again even as a kid growing up in a little town called Eumundi in country Queensland I remember my mum and dad saying ‘just be gentle with so and so, he is still suffering from the shell-shock'. I am talking about the early 60s, of events more than half a century removed.
The recovery, the recovery of each of those lives. Not just of the 150,000 wounded but of the horrors which were witnessed by those who were not. The mental trauma in an age and a time when no one knew what trauma was. When there wasn't a psychiatrist or psychologist within cooee, people couldn't spell the name let alone dispense the practice. Yet they were there - these brave young men of Australia and their suffering families coping with the sheer dimensions of physical, emotional, psychological recovery.
I cannot begin to think how I as human being could have survived those trenches. I cannot begin to think how I could have survived. To have watched, to have heard and to have seen people blown apart in front of you and for their remains to be buried under acres of mud not to be discovered and brought to dignified burial for some decades following, half centuries following, nearly full centuries following.
It is a sight when you put it into your imagination, you think how could any human endure watching that and surviving. The physicality of the brutality and the searing emotional scars and psychological scars stayed with so many of these veterans for a lifetime.
I think that's also part of what captures the Australian imagination, the Australian soul today. Because it is not just the grand narrative of nations, each of these essays, each of these essays of the 333,000 who served is a very personal essay.
I think the other thing for those who did not enlist, who were women and who kissed goodbye to their sons and their lovers and their husbands. These silent heroes of this great tragedy and the silent heroes of every war waiting with fear for the arrival of the minister or the priest, that terrible, terrible part of the nation's story.
Women walking to the other side of the street when they saw the priest walking up the street in case the priest was coming to their home to deliver the bad news that they had lost a son or a husband or a father.
I think that's also what commends an extraordinary feat of arms, this extraordinary chapter of human tragedy to our minds and to our souls. And then the challenge of reconstruction, of resettlement, the agency of government working through the 20s and the 30s with these shattered and battered lives to craft out a new existence.
The trials, the tribulations and the tragedies of the soldier settlement scheme of which we've studied much, of which we've seen some success and much failure in the various parts of Australia in which it was embarked upon.
And here we saw the first efforts, the first efforts to try and refashion people's lives and to rebuild the communities from which they came after the extraordinary impact on the economies of those households and those communities through the loss, such huge loss of life.
And in the sweep of our history, something which is reflected on with great intensity by those charged with the responsibility of the reconstruction after the Second World War. Chifley, Curtin and the others reflecting on what had gone wrong post 1919 and how to handle and support the challenges of reconstruction, resettlement and repatriation.
It is a lesson we still must learn again today as we welcome back our veterans from wars still being fought.
And the final part of why I think this is such an extraordinary story for our nation's narrative, our nation's still young narrative, is the absolute standout messages of human courage and endurance.
What staggers me about the First World War, and for those of us who know something about the writing of military dispatches and what an incomplete art and science they could have been, is how many stories of heroism have never gone recorded. You hear snippets of them, in the second and third hand accounts of great battles and great encounters.
Simple, brave acts of heroism, not sufficiently corroborated for the purposes of the military historians and those who dispense of the military honours but they're part and parcel of the fabric of the Australian experience.
Heroic feats on the field of battle, heroic patient achievements in dealing with the aftermath of battle. Weary Dunlop writ large. Simpson and his Donkey, Weary Dunlop in a different war and so that tradition proceeds as well.
Courage, sheer courage.
A friend of mine, who was a prisoner of war in the last world war described his job as having to tend the cremation of each of the Australians who died. I cannot imagine having the courage to do that. As each of his mates died his job was to dispense of their bodies. Imagine the courage required in doing that.
So why is this war so significant in our nation's story? Why is the aftermath of this war so significant in our nation's future story? I think it is all these things. The grand narrative of nations and the personal story of families. People at their absolute best. People suffering the absolute worst.
A nation without history is like a person without memory, and that is why these Archives are such an important part of our nation's memory.
I thank those who have put together this great exhibition and it is with great pride as Prime Minister of Australia that I declare open this exhibition Shell-shocked: Australia after the Armistice.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
Today, one hundred years since Andrew Fisher became Prime Minister of Australia, is an excellent opportunity for us to recall an often neglect Prime Minister, who did so much to build the economic, social and defence foundations of our nation.
History has perhaps allowed Fisher to be overshadowed by the larger-than-life personalities of contemporaries like Billy Hughes and Alfred Deakin.
But as a Prime Minister of a country still in its first decade of nationhood, his achievements were remarkable.
And one hundred years on, it's time we give Andrew Fisher his due recognition.
It is often noted that Fisher led the first Labor Government to command a parliamentary majority in any nation in the world.
That is an achievement of historic significance.
As David Day's new biography shows, Fisher's life story really is the stuff of legend  -  from the grinding poverty of a Scottish coal mining town, to a new life in Australia at age 22, his election to the Queensland State Parliament in 1893 and his elevation to the office of Prime Minister at the age of 46, just 15 years later.
But to Fisher, politics was never just about getting there.
It was about what you did once you'd got there.
Fisher was interested in reform, not just acclaim.
It's his achievements in government that are the most remarkable feature of Andrew Fisher's life:
     * as a great nation-builder;
     * as a social reformer who helped embed the great tradition of the fair go into the nation's soul. and
     * as a strategist for Australia's national defence.
As Clem Lloyd wrote, as Prime Minister Andrew Fisher “embarked on an exhilarating wave of public policy inception, innovation and embellishment, seismic in its dimensions and impact.”
And it's those achievements we can celebrate today.
Fisher's achievements as a nation-builder are nothing short of extraordinary.
His Government established:
     * the national capital;
     * the transcontinental railway;
     * the Commonwealth Bank;
     * a national paper currency;
     * the reform of Federal/State financial relations by shifting to per capita payments;
     * the single penny rate for postage across the nation, and
     * the fostering of the arts with a distinctly Australian sensibility.
Many of these ideas had been talked about for years.
Andrew Fisher's great achievement was to turn those ideas into action - bringing a sustained political commitment to the legislative, financial and logistic challenges of national development.
Fisher's legacy is an enduring one.
Consider the establishment of our national capital.
That we even stand today in this building, in this national capital, is in part because of Fisher's legacy.
As Dr David Headon noted last month in his Senate Occasional Lecture, the so-called ‘Battle of the Sites' had raged since the earliest days of the Federation movement, and as the years rolled by, it had increasingly become a war of attrition.
It had engendered intense colonial rivalries and jealousies, with communities across the nation scrambling over each other to promote themselves as the future national capital.
It's extraordinary to think that the nation's founders deliberately searched for the coldest possible locations for the nation's capital  -  because of a widespread belief that Anglo Saxons and Anglo Celts, as Dr Headon says, “functioned at their best, their British Empire best, in a cold climate” .
Indeed, the West Australian Premier John Forrest had urged that the new capital “ought to be a cool place; indeed the coolest place in Australia”.
Those of us who've survived a few Canberra winters might think this place would have swiftly knocked out any rival towns.
But in fact Canberra wasn't the founders' first choice  -  there were even colder options.
The first choice of the nation's Parliament in 1904 was in fact the town of Dalgety on the Snowy River.
Not everyone was convinced  -  Dr Headon notes that one Queensland MP spent a few nights in Dalgety and warned its winds were so fierce that if you ventured outside in winter had to hang on for dear life.
Another MP warned Dalgety was so freezing cold that it would “kill half of the older men”.
In any event, Dalgety was not to be.
The NSW Government refused to hand over the land at Dalgety, and demanded a site closer to Sydney.
What followed was four more years of investigations, arguments and tours of possible sites across NSW by Federal MPs.
This didn't end until Andrew Fisher became Prime Minister and settled the question of the nation's capital  -  recognising how important it was to the nation's future.
Fisher himself was not an early advocate for the Canberra site  -  as he said in introducing the Seat of Government Act to the Parliament, his preference had been the town of Dalgety.
But he recognised that a nation needed a capital, and he wanted the question settled.
Just a few weeks into Fisher's first term, Parliament passed the Seat of Government Act  -  and Australia at last had that capital.
And Fisher's Government got on with the job of building the new capital, overcoming opposition from among his own Senators to provide the funding to get the new capital going.
Fisher's successful establishment of the Commonwealth Bank was another great major nation-building achievement.
After the widespread collapse of financial institutions in the 1890s Depression, Labor had strongly advocated the establishment of a national bank.
But this only became a reality when Fisher delivered the parliamentary majority at the 1910 election that made this initiative possible.
Fisher also played a key role in making sure the new Commonwealth Bank was effective, personally recruiting a highly experienced banker to establish the new institution.
The Commonwealth Bank improved Australia's financial and economic self-reliance, making it easier for Australian businesses to borrow and for the Government to obtain a source of cheap loan funds, independent of the English banks.
The Commonwealth Bank also guaranteed the security of bank deposits, as well as making Australia less reliant on English banks for future borrowing needs.
Another major nation-building achievement of the Fisher Government was the transcontinental railway across Australia, a piece of national economic infrastructure that connected the east to the west.
The transcontinental railway had been talked about for many years.
Indeed Western Australia had sought to include in the federal Constitution a provision relating to its construction by the Commonwealth.
But it was not until Fisher that the talk ended and the action began  -  with the Commonwealth authorising construction of the railway through the Kalgoorlie to Port Augusta Railway Act in 1911, and then financing its construction.
The nation-building agenda strengthened the Australia's economic base, built foundations for future prosperity and fostered a sense of national identity in a nation that had been in existence for little over a decade.
Fisher's extensive social reforms are a second enduring legacy of his time in office.
Fisher believed that national governments had an important role in overcoming injustice and building a fairer society for working people and for all the people who would otherwise fall through the cracks.
Fisher campaigned vigorously for the age pension throughout his political career.
When Deakin as Prime Minister adopted a lesser version of the age and invalid pension plan than Fisher had been advocating, Fisher put politics to one side and supported Deakin's plan.
Pragmatically deciding that half a loaf was better than none for Australians unable to work and without means, Labor joined with Deakin's Liberals and the Invalid and Old-Age Pensions Act became law in 1908.
Importantly, Fisher tackled the problem of broadening the Commonwealth revenue base  -  the challenge that for almost a decade had prevented the establishment of the age pension.
The result was that in July 1909, Prime Minister Andrew Fisher presided over the introduction of an age pension for women over 60 and men over 65  -  a great and enduring social reform. 
Fisher also fought for decent workers' compensation throughout his parliamentary life - a deeply personal fight for him, after he had lost his brothers James and Robert in mining accidents and his father had contracted black lung disease.
Just as he had championed workers' compensation legislation in the Queensland Parliament, as Prime Minister Fisher secured the passage of the first Commonwealth Workmen's Compensation Act in 1912.
Fisher was also strongly committed to advancing the role of women. Earlier in his career he had strongly supported women's suffrage  -  a cause to which Margaret Fisher also gave prominent support when she participated in a suffragette's march while visiting London in 1911.
In office, Prime Minister Fisher introduced the first ‘baby bonus' or maternity allowance in the nation's history  -  a payment designed to help women with the medical cost of a doctor or midwife at childbirth, thus reducing the risks to both mother and baby.
These measures  -  for working people, for mothers, for the aged, sick and injured  -  all reflected the strength of the Fisher Government's commitment to social reform and building a fairer society.
A third enduring contribution of the Fisher Government was its role in planning for the defences of the young Australian nation.
Fisher worried deeply about potential security threats to Australia, a concern reflect in his first cabinet meeting as Prime Minister where he undertook to take the lead on defence policy.
The establishment of an Australian navy had been part of Labor's platform since 1902.
Fisher vigorously pursued the aim of an Australian navy under Australian control.
He rejected the widely held belief that the Royal Navy would always be there to protect Australia.
He wasn't anti-British  -  indeed, he is famous for his pledge that Australia would defend Britain “to our last man and our last shilling” - and he accepted the Admiralty's wartime control of the Australian fleet.
But he understood that the new Australian nation needed to take responsibility for its national defence.
That is why he established Royal Australian Navy.
The Fisher Government introduced compulsory military training, a step that substantially strengthened the Commonwealth armed force.
Fisher opened the Royal Military College at Duntroon in 1911, following the recommendations of Lord Kitchener review of Australia's defence in 1910 initiated by the Deakin Government in 1909.
The Fisher Government also approved the first funding for military aviation training in 1911.
Fisher also appointed the first chief of Australia's general staff, Colonel William Bridges  -  a soldier whose death from injuries at Gallipoli underscored the gravity of Australia's losses in the war.
With this record of achievement, it is significant that when the First World War broke out during the 1914 election campaign, Australia turned to Fisher and Labor for leadership.
All up, Fisher had less than five years in office. The obstacles he faced were huge - yet his achievements were prodigious.
He faced war, reluctant coalition partners, financial constraints and a government with still relatively limited infrastructure.
Yet he led one of the most productive and industrious governments in Australian history.
As he set out from Gympie for the first sitting of Australia's new national Parliament in 1901, Fisher had told his local supporters that he had “one aim in life”:
“to assist to the best of his ability in making the Australian people the most happy and prosperous on the face of the earth.”
Fisher didn't achieve everything he aspired to.
But he did fulfil this one, simple, noble, aim.
And he left a rich legacy in so doing.
A hundred years later, it's time we rediscovered it, and gave Fisher and his achievements the recognition they so justly deserve. 


For those of us on the Labor side of politics, Sunday 25 November 2007 should have been a day of absolute happiness because of the election result.
But you know, November 25 wasn't quite like that for a number of us and each of us here today knows why.
All of us missed Matt on last year's election campaign and we miss him still today and there'll only ever be one Matt Price.
Today however, as Matilda has just said, isn't a sad occasion; it's a happy occasion. 
Because this book is a celebration of one of the greats of Australian journalism.
It's a celebration of a man who could write as informatively about AFL, about cricket, about golf, as he could do about the daily business of the Australian Parliament, the Doobie Brothers or the onset of middle age, an affliction which besets most of us in this place.
It's a celebration of he, who John Hartigan described, I think last year as a quality bloke.
It's a celebration of Matt, dedicated husband, dedicated Dad, dedicated family man.
It's a celebration of a man for all seasons. In fact, one of the bloggers at the time of Matt's death last year said of his writings “he always puts a bit of himself in everything that he writes”.
And I think that's what makes it stand out because all these things  -  Matt the Dad, Matt the family man, Matt the keen observer of political events, Matt the lover of bat and ball and all things to do with sport, Matt the community man.
All these things found their way in one way or another into things that he wrote and he did it with such style.
From politics to sport, music to culture, Matt's musings on just about anything, reminded of a fully rounded human being that Matt was. In fact he was the genuine all-rounder.
He could bat, he could bowl, he could field, he could probably keep as well and then turn around and describe the game afterwards. He's that sort of guy and we see that again alive in his writings.
One thing I'm reminded of in wandering through Matt's columns is just how often he strayed beyond the boundaries of his topic, whether it was politics, sport, the arts, family life. There was something always uncontainable about Matt.
Just as his trousers could never quite contain his shirt tails, and the phone could never quite contain his booming, joyful voice - a column could never quite contain Matt to a single topic, unless he was writing about of course, the Fremantle Dockers.
Matt could somehow start an article talking about politics and by the time it was over, he'd ranged far, wide and broad, from his high school reunion, to a Bob Dylan concert he'd gone to, taking you for a spin in his Volvo and then he'd have you over for a meal with the family. All in 800 words  -  stunning stuff.
And it's always more than an entertaining tumble of words  -  Matt always seemed to have a point, a fresh observation and a fresh observation freshly put and therein lay the art and the style and the panache.
He starts a column talking about the 80-something-year old down the street named Joe, who'd never recovered from losing his wife - and by the end of it he's writing sympathetically about “the abiding joy of sport” and how to quote him “the grandstands, the pubs, the lounge rooms of the world are filled with sad people seeking occasional solace in the quirks of a bouncing ball.”
If you think about it, there is something extraordinarily insightful in that observation.
If you think about it, it is an observation of the human condition, rendered in almost exquisite poetry and that is why it's memorable.
Because I think also an observation like that, you see Matt the compassionate human being, who experienced and saw other people's pain.
These are thoughtful articles, always insightful, but were never plodding, never ponderous and never heavy in their style.
As Paul Kelly remarks in his book  -  in this book I should say  -  there's a special lightness in Matt's writing, a lightness of spirit, perhaps reflecting Matt's ability to keep politics in perspective and in its place in the bigger story of life.
Something much needed in this, our own temple of democracy, where from time to time we become excessively preoccupied with the (inaudible) of our own politics and our own personal political ambitions.
Matt always seemed to be writing on a broader human canvas, and that I think is what commends him so much to us today.
That lightness often reflects too Matt's very Australian sense of the plight of the underdog  -  something so deep that he was even prompted to support the English in the 2005 Ashes series, which reminds us, there were times when Matt's sense of fair play transcended the rational.
It's a sensitivity too that shone through in little stories he'd convey about people he encountered, or in those extraordinary, difficult times, like the tragic Yogyakarta plane crash involving Press Gallery colleagues Morgan Mellish and Cynthia Banham.
Of course Matt was not always so sensitive.
He sharpened the pencil a little when it came to dealing with politicians, his meal of choice.
He saw through our foibles, he exposed our follies, he exposed our vanities and our inconsistencies. And that was just the Liberal Party. He really got going when he got onto the Labor Party. He saw that as the main course.
He made us relax a little bit, laugh a little bit at ourselves and always laugh a whole lot more when others were suffering from his sharpened pen.
I suspect my colleagues would quietly confess that once you'd felt the sharp end of Matt's pencil, you always had a faint shiver as you opened the Oz to see what he'd said in today's Sketch.
Though if your opponents had had a rough day in the Parliament the day before, you'd open the paper with relish to see what Matt had to say about their experience of the day before.
So when I opened the contents page of Top Price, I can't say I didn't shudder just a little to see an entire chapter dedicated to what has been called ‘Kevinism'.
Matt didn't show much mercy to me at the beginning, or actually, towards the end of my time of association with him.
First opening up a front on my carefully manicured hair style  -  in Matt's words, quote, “with the greatest respect, Kevin, it's a shocker”.
I've been affected by that ever since. Much more so my hairdresser in Brisbane who to this day still wishes to remain nameless.
Then there was the scientific dissection of my hand movements  -  the Count Manoeuvre, the Karate Chop, the Fist Thrust Forward and the Thumb Over the Shoulder. That “don't throw fairness out the back door”.
And as I said, if you'd grown up watching television in the 60s, on the earlier occasion, and watching some of those marvellous puppet shows, then frankly you were condemned to that in your future political career as well.
I worry about how much footage he must have watched to come up with the analysis of my hand movements and I'm only glad he didn't write particularly on the question of the examination of my ear on a particular day in the House of Representatives.
Then there was his outrageous assertion that I often deliberately sought out media coverage. And he said this, I think this is most unfair, he said “had Rudd been born female, buxom and American he'd have left Paris, Britney and Anna Nicole in the shade” unquote.
Unfair, not necessarily untrue.
But I might let that one just go through to the keeper.
But still, there were the good days, mostly days when my name wasn't in his column.
And every day, Matt brought colour and warmth to the often bland debates of the parliamentary chamber.
You see, he literally did write a “sketch”  -  because while Matt used words, in fact, what he was doing was painting pictures. He was actually drawing cartoons and he was enlivening our mind's imagination in a different way.
That was his gift and it was an extraordinary gift.
Like the column in which Matt writes that Labor's strategy in parliament  -  I think this refers to my own period  -  was having on my then political opponent Mr Howard. He described it as this, quote: “roughly the same effect as a brace of redback spiders in the prime ministerial boxer shorts” unquote.
It takes a unique mind to actually put those two visual metaphors together  -  Prime Ministerial boxer shorts  -  let's not dwell on that, and a brace of redback spiders. But to unite them in a single phrase I think requires, and took and reflected genuine talent, inspiration and poetry.
I'm not sure how he came up with that particular image, and I'm not sure I want to know how he came up with that particular image. It's certainly evocative, particularly for those of us who grew up in rural Queensland for whom the thought of a late night visit to the little house down the back, and the threats of arachnophobia, the fears of arachnophobia  -  I suppose arachnophobia is a fear  -  visiting the outhouse with spiders in the middle of the night. Maybe that was part of Matt's own experience, I'm not sure.
But as I sat opposite Mr Howard in the Parliament last year, images like that, that is of a brace of redback spiders in the Prime Ministerial boxer shorts, never entirely left my mind. And that again, we can skip.
Then there's his passing observation last year that when the worm turns in politics, it can wrap itself around your throat and strangle you. Wow.
Or his comment in late 2005 that the legislation had been tumbling through the Parliament like dirty underwear in an industrial drier.
These are remarkable phrases. These are remarkable expressions. Each of them indelible.
Sometimes disturbing, often incisive and forever fresh, but above all, simply first-class writing, and a tribute to his profession.
Matt was a sophisticated master of the ancient art of political satire  -  poking fun at us politicians, personalities and institutions and with just one image or phrase, cutting through the mounds of blather, which affect us all in our various professions from time to time in this place.
Matt's great skill was that he was never just clever and funny, he was never just informative, he was never just arguing his point.
He was always doing more than any of those things, or all of those things together.
There was always something a little extra in a Matt Price column  -  a touching aside, a breathtaking analogy, or a startling new general theory, like his argument, that I thought of a lot, that you never need more than four albums from any musician.
And that's why his writing gave us so much pleasure.
Congratulations to HarperCollins and to the team at News Limited for the good work of putting this compilation together.
It's a fitting tribute to one of our best, to one of your best, to one of the nation's best.
And it lets us all enjoy some of Matt's best columns a second time round.
I hope this book can be an inspiration for a new generation of writers.
If it can help spark in tomorrow's writers some of the curiosity, some of the style, some of the exuberance that belongs to Matt, the newspapers still have a very bright future indeed.
Susie, to Jack, Matilda and Harry, we're delighted, absolutely delighted, that you can be with us today  -  and we know that this has been a tough year for each of you.
Well, we don't really know how tough it's been because this is a very personal experience.
But we also know that you have been among friends - that you've been among real friends.
For me, it is now a singular honour, a singular honour, to officially launch Top Price  -  Matt Price on Sports, Politics, Music and Life.
Matt Price, an Australian renaissance man: Top Price, top bloke, top journalist, top dad, top husband, top mate, top Australian.
Thank you.


Tonight we're here to celebrate achievement and tonight we're here also to celebrate achievement against the odds. And we're also here to celebrate achievement that has added to this nation, Australia's great strength.
And that is those who have achieved in this great field of business.
As I was reflecting tonight on the work of Joseph Assaf, it in itself is a story which I think speaks to the heart of Australia. This book, which hasn't been launched yet Joseph, In Someone Else's Shoes, is a great story writ large about the lives of so many who have come to this country from afar and made this country great.
The story of a young Joseph, 40 years ago, lining up at the airport in Beirut, as a young Lebanese, who didn't even have the gumption to tell his parents that he was coming to Australia, and to discover at the airport that he had to have a new, clean pair of shoes in order to get past Australian customs and quarantine.
And then having been turned back the first time because the flight was cancelled and gone back home to reappear on a subsequent day, and to be then told that the pair of shoes that he had had, which were then new and clean, on the previous few days, were no longer new and clean. They had a bit of dust on them. And so he could not be allowed on the aircraft.
Well enter into central casting some nameless Australian immigration official who shall be forever sainted, whoever he or she was. Because in the great spirit of Australia, and probably us being the convict colony, he resorted to some forms of felony instead to help the young Joseph out.
He procured another pair of shoes. I didn't say nicked, he procured, obtained is the neutral word. And having done so, provided the young Joseph with a new pair of shoes, tan in colour, Joseph's favourite colour. In fact he hates tan.
Twice the size of his normal size in shoe and there he was allowed to board the aircraft and begin his new life in Australia.
And so goes the circumstance and the happenstance of so many people who make their lives here in this great country of ours. Not just this century, not just the one that has passed, not even the one before that.
So many different stories from so many parts of the world, each rich in its own depth and diversity. But each united in one thing  -  coming here to Australia not just to make a new life but with a sense of determination to make that life an absolute success.
The good thing about the Joseph story though, is his reflections contained in this book - which hasn't been launched yet - but let me read you something from it.
It's about what you pick up when you arrive here in Australia. And if there is a theme to this book, it seems to be that the great thing which has crafted his business career, that through it, what crafts the success of so many business careers here in this country, is not just a celebration of diversity but the actual deployment of diversity for what you do in business and in life.
He says here, ‘I enjoy the fruits of thousands of years of collective wisdom'. That is an elegant phrase. He says also that ‘from my own people, the Lebanese, or the ancient Phoenicians, I've learned how to learn from everyone else'.
If you anything of the history of the Phoenicians and their role in the history of the Mediterranean prior to the rise of the Greeks and prior to the rise of the Romans, the Phoenicians knew everybody, they knew everywhere, they knew every language, and so they traded.
There was a great wisdom in the work and lives of the Phoenicians and he says, coming from Lebanon, the land of the Phoenicians, ‘I have learned how to learn from everyone else'.
He goes on to say, in a celebration of some of the cultures he encountered here down under, ‘I quickly began to understand the cultures of the Arabs. It was they who opened my eyes to the meaning of hospitality. That welcoming smile and that genuine desire to open ones' heart and home to both friends and strangers.'
He speaks also of his second language, French. ‘And with this linguistic tool I was able to mix with a new set of friends who taught me a healthy respect for language.'
He then talks of his arrival and dealings with genuine Aussie mates, who encouraged each other to be fair dinkum.
I am not sure what the Ancient Phoenician for fair dinkum was, or what the Arabic term for fair dinkum is. But that became part of Joseph's experience.
And then he speaks of his encounter with his wife, who is herself, an Italian. Angela Bianca, who he has described, I think in the introduction, as ‘my angelic Bianca, or my white angel'.
And he says ‘while the Italians taught me about what it means to be passionate, indeed my wife Angela is Italian and she taught me a lot too'. And he says with some modesty, ‘and not just about passion'.
What is nice about this book, what is elegant about this book is that it is a story of reflection, about one man's experience of arriving on these shores of Australia from distant shores and absorbing all that we had to offer, in all of its diversity and then adding some. A new richness, a new depth, a new diversity.
Which brings me to why we are here this evening. Each one of you, from whichever community from which you come, brings to this great land Australia something new and something different. Something quite wonderful.
I have often said, as someone who is 100 per cent Anglo Celtic, that were it not for the arrival of so many of the ethnicities represented in this room, this nation in its second century and its third century would have been condemned to a future based entirely on English cuisine. Could you think of a fate worse than death?
But it is not just that. It is that what you bring to this country is a sense of determination to succeed. A sense that you will make not just a success for yourselves and your families but a success for your new land Australia.
My family has been in the country since the days of the Second Fleet. But you know that each group of Australians who arrive here by boat, by plane, they bring something new, something special and something different, and something which then becomes quite uniquely Australian.
In business, and Joseph made mention of this in his remarks before, there is something more for us to be grasped in terms of the diversity which you give us in our place in the commerce of the world.
You are our automatic bridge to the world. In so much of what we do in commerce, export, in imports, in trade and investment and what is now the worldwide economy transacted digitally, you form such natural, wonderful, diverse, fluent, culturally sensitive human bridges to the rest of the world, that you are for us an enormous national strength and one to be celebrated.
And so in these days when we are confronted with the global financial crisis, becoming a global economic crisis, becoming in turn, a global employment crisis, the passions and the talents and abilities and the capacities of the women and men of commerce represented in this room becomes even more important for the nation and for its future.
And so my invocation to each of you as men and women of Australian business is - as the days get harder, and they will, to draw on every element of the talent and the skill and the linguistic and cultural connectedness that you have with the rest of the world, to get out there and to work hard and to carry forward with confidence the great name of Australia in business.
And I am confident you will.
For those of you who are here tonight as finalists in these ethnic business awards, can I say as Prime Minister of Australia, congratulations. Whether you win, whether you come second, whether you come third, congratulations. It is a great thing that you are here.
Because you represent the hopes of us all.
I conclude with these remarks of the author, whose book has not been launched, this is it, he did not know I was bringing it this evening and that is true, and therefore his work I could not possibly quote in anticipation of the release date, but I have.
There have got to be some advantages in being Prime Minister.
But I conclude with these words, more eloquent than mine and by the author himself, he says:
‘Multiculturalism is not a passing fancy. It is not a hobby. It is not a Government policy. It is not a nice thing to do or a marketing opportunity.
‘Equally, diversity is not a choice. It is not an option. It is not a public relations exercise or an employee relations program. In Australia diversity is a fact of life and multiculturalism is a way of life. May it ever be so.'
[ends]


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
Welcome to the nation's capital, and welcome to one of the biggest gatherings of elected representatives in Australian history.
Today we launch the Australian Council of Local Government.
And today we turn a page and begin a new era in the relationship between Australia's national government and the local governments that represent local communities across our nation.
Today brings together more than 400 mayors and representatives from councils and shires across this nation.
Never before have councils from different states and territories been brought together in a forum like this.
We gather today for three reasons:
First, to establish a new, stronger and more coherent relationship between the federal and local spheres of government.
Second, to receive your input on our election commitment to the constitutional recognition of local government, rather than us simply imposing our view.
And third, to begin work on a planning reform agenda to improve infrastructure and service delivery across this country.
In the past couple of hours I have arrived back from the G-20 Summit meeting in Washington  -  convened in response to the global financial crisis.
The Summit was an important milestone for the global economy  -  bringing together the leaders of the world's 20 largest economies, comprising 85 per cent of gross world product.
The fact that the US brought these 20 nations together reflects the size of the challenge we now confront.
The US and Europe are on the verge of recession.
Germany and Japan, the second and third largest economies in the world are already in recession.
An economic slowdown has hit our own region  -  including China.
The Summit also demonstrated a recognition of the changing centre of gravity in the world economy.
Simply put, global economic growth won't get back on track without the G-20 economies of our own region  -  China, India, Indonesia and South Korea  -  economies that now comprise a large share of global economic growth.
The Summit resolved that member economies would take “immediate steps to use fiscal measures to stimulate domestic demand to rapid effect”.
Where the private economy cannot fill the growth gap, let us be clear  -  government must step in.
That's what the Australian Government resolved last month when we announce our Economic Security Strategy.
That's what global governments resolved in their communiqué last weekend.
To begin to chart a course of action to see us through this great challenge.
We know there are no easy solutions or quick fixes to the global financial crisis.
This is going to be a long, drawn-out crisis that will have a real impact in Australia - leading to slowing economic growth and increased unemployment.
The Australian economy is sound but we will not be immune from the global slowdown and the real possibility of a global recession.
Australia has already taken decisive steps to stimulate our economy.
Our $10.4 billion Economic Security Strategy provides a substantial fiscal stimulus to underpin growth.
Last week I announced a thirteen-year, $6.2 billion New Car Plan to transform the Australian automotive industry and support Australian manufacturing and Australian jobs.
These initiatives build on the $47 billion in tax cuts for working families that we delivered in this year's Budget.
This is important progress.
But it is only the beginning.
Because we are waging a war against global recession and global unemployment  -  and we are determined to deploy every tool at our disposal.
The government will take whatever decisive action is necessary to protect economic growth and jobs for Australians.
We have also taken strong and decisive action to stabilise our financial system.
We guaranteed bank deposits to build confidence in our banks and protect people's savings.
We have also guaranteed the term wholesale funding of banks so that credit can continue to flow.
As with the real economy, growth and jobs, the Government remains determined to take whatever action is necessary to maintain the stability of the financial system into the future.
Once again we still face many challenges.
And once again, through the Washington Summit, the G-20 has resolved to combat these challenges together through the reform program we have agreed on.
Just as the G-20 meeting was critical to the future of the global economy, today's meeting of the Australian Council of Local Government is also important to our national economy.
You cannot have a strong Australian economy without a healthy global economy.
Equally, you can't have a strong national economy if you don't have strong local economies.
Because local government has an important role in strengthening and stimulating local economies, local businesses and local jobs.
That is one of a number of reasons why the Government attaches priority to a new partnership with local government.
Your role in the local economy.
Your role in the delivery of local services.
Together with your enduring role in supporting the local community fabric, including the voluntary sector.
Analysis of Federalism
It is often said of Australia's system of Federalism  -  Commonwealth, State and Local Government  -  that if it didn't already exist, and we were starting again today, we'd be unlikely to create the system we have now.
Some services are provided by three levels of government.
Some services are inadequately provided by any level of government.
Duplication in some policy areas.
Buck-passing in others.
The complexity of the Australian system of government is revealed by analysis of the budgets of the Commonwealth, State and local spheres of government.
Consider how revenue is collected:
     * The Commonwealth collects 82 per cent of government revenue.
     * The State and Territory Governments collect 15 per cent.
     * Local Governments collect just 3 per cent of revenue.
This suggests the Commonwealth has all the money.
But we don't see a quarter of the revenue we collect.
It goes in one door of Treasury and out another  -  primarily into the hands of State and Territory governments, but some to local Government as well.
The financial churn and redistribution of revenue between levels of government makes it difficult for the public to know where their money is actually going.
Our federal system is no less complicated on the expenditure side of the budget.
The Commonwealth's main expenditure items are:
     * social security and welfare  -  a third of the national budget
     * health and hospitals  -  another sixth of the budget;
     * education is $19 billion a year;
     * national security is $18 billion a year.
The State and Territory government's main expenditures are:
     * Health and education  -  each about a quarter of their budgets;
     * Transport and policing  -  each about 10 per cent of their budgets; and
     * A range of other community services.
Local government budgets must be stretched across many priorities, including health, social security, welfare, housing, community amenities, business development, transport, communications, recreation and culture and general public services.
Rather than answer the question of ‘what do local governments do?', it is better to ask ‘what don't local governments do?'
In individual areas of policy, there is extensive overlap between the responsibilities of different levels of government.
A Business Council of Australia study, Infrastructure Action Plan for Future for Future Prosperity, highlighted the complexities in the delineation of responsibilities for economic infrastructure among the different levels of Government.
It found that:
     * While the Commonwealth government is responsible for aviation services, state, territory and local governments are responsible for regional airports
     * While national roads are funded by the Commonwealth, they are built by state governments
     * While local governments are responsible for local roads, they are funded by the Commonwealth and state governments as well
     * All levels of government have some involvement in railway infrastructure provision and services
     * And in areas that currently fall within the sphere of local and state government, including public transport, water, and energy, there are greater demands for Commonwealth involvement.
The Australian Government has a deep commitment to reforming the Federation.
Necessary for the Australian economy.
Necessary for the Australian people who demand better services.
Necessary for the Australian system of government which requires greater accountability.
We must have cleaner lines of responsibility.
We must have less duplication and waste.
And we must have stronger partnerships between levels of government.
The people are demanding we cooperate  -  rather than perpetuate conflict in order to avoid problems.
Local Government is critical to Australia's system of government.
It is critical to our national economy.
Local government directly supports more than 168,000 jobs around the country.
That infrastructure and those services in turn underpin hundreds of billions of dollars of economic activity.
From water supply to childcare provision; from road construction and engineering to planning and development; from essential community services to building a more sustainable economy  -  local government is much more than just an adjunct to State and Territory governments.
Local government is the level of representation closest to the Australian people.
The Government that I lead believes in supporting local government.
We believe in investing in local government.
We believe in partnering with local government.
And we believe in partnering with local government in a long term reform program that better serves the nation, the economy and local communities.
The Government's commitment to a new partnership with local government is part of our wider commitment to new ways of governing that are relevant to the 21st century.
The establishment of the Australian Council of Local Government is part of this reform program.
And this is the start.
It is our goal to build on the strong tradition of partnership with local government established by previous Federal Labor governments.
As long ago as the 1940s, Ben Chifley thought local government was so important that even while Prime Minister he continued to serve on the Abercrombie Shire Council in Bathurst.
The Curtin Government initiated a series of Commonwealth-State conferences on regional economic development between 1944 and 1947, believing that all three tiers of government needed to work together to ensure successful regional development, management of population growth, and provision for housing and water supplies.
After Gough Whitlam came to office in 1972, he established for the first time a direct relationship between the Commonwealth and local governments.
Whitlam understood the role of local government in nation-building, establishing direct grants to local government bodies for regional development in 1974.
From the 1974-75 Budget, ongoing General Revenue Assistance grants were introduced.
The Whitlam Government invested in critical local infrastructure such as sewerage systems in the new suburban estates of fast-growing cities.
These grants also funded flood mitigation, community health centres, urban renewal, recreation facilities, environmental projects, infrastructure for tourism and other local infrastructure.
Today, communities around Australia are still benefiting from the hard infrastructure built in those years through Commonwealth and Local Government collaboration. 
The Hawke and Keating Governments revived the Commonwealth commitment to local government and local economic development.
In 1986 the Hawke Government launched the Country Centres Project to fund community-driven initiatives that generated local economic development.
In the 1990s, the Hawke and Keating Governments invested in local capital works to stimulate economic growth, providing direct grants to local government for social and economic infrastructure.
The Building Better Cities program under Brian Howe involved a significant investment in urban consolidation, urban renewal and economic development projects that embraced Commonwealth, State and local governments.
This led a revival of inner city areas and provincial centres, redeveloping public housing and improving public transport networks  -  with an innovative funding model built around achieving real outcomes.
The Government I lead is also committed to strengthening local government.
In this year's Budget, the Commonwealth is providing $2.2 billion through financial assistance grants and Roads to Recovery funding.
We have also committed to working with local government to address housing affordability through our Housing Affordability Fund and developing our regions through our Better Regions program.
As I said earlier, the federal government has three purposes for today's Council meeting.
     * First, to establish a new, stronger relationship between the federal and local spheres of government.
     * Second, to receive your input on our election commitment to the constitutional recognition of local government.
     * And third, to begin work on a planning reform agenda to improve infrastructure and service delivery across this country.
The starting point for our reform agenda is a stronger relationship between the Commonwealth and local government.
Until now, there has been no mechanism for the Australian Government to consult local government as a whole.
The role of local government has never been clearly defined.
This is why we have established the Australian Council of Local Government. 
With the ACLG in place, we will now have a framework for future coordination.
Greater coordination will help give local government a direct voice into Commonwealth policy making, as well as accelerating the implementation of program innovation, performance improvements and accountability in service delivery.
The ACLG also provides a mechanism for the Australian Government to consult local government on Constitutional recognition.
At the last election, Federal Labor said that we would take steps towards Constitutional recognition of local government. And we intend to deliver on that commitment.
The people in this room know that previous governments have sought to give recognition to local government in the Constitution twice before  -  in 1974 and 1988.
However, they were both unsuccessful. 
The Liberal and National parties opposed both.
And they were lost.
That's why we have not pre-determined a time line or a set of words.  This must be got right.
And rather than us simply dictating from on high what that should be, we want to take your views into account.
I understand that ALGA is undertaking a serious consultation process with member councils  -  and I know that ALGA is aware of the challenges in forging a consensus among all local councils.
The Commonwealth Government will also support and respect that process.
I understand it will culminate in a special convention in Melbourne in December, and the outcomes from that meeting will be especially important for the Commonwealth as we move forward on this important matter.
The third aspect of today's Council meeting is for us to begin the task of improving infrastructure and service delivery in this country.
We need a planning reform agenda for local government.
Local governments already play a significant role in planning the nation's infrastructure.
They are responsible for 657,000 kilometres of roads across the nation.
They have a total asset stock worth over $214 billion.
A significant amount of this infrastructure is now under great strain.
Indeed, a report by PricewaterhouseCoopers in 2006 estimated that there is a $1.1 billion annual under-spend in the renewal of community infrastructure by local government.
Local governments are facing both rising costs for infrastructure provision and in many areas, growing demand for services in local communities.
Today is an important step in the Commonwealth's commitment to immediate infrastructure investment.
But we also need to deal with the long term reform of the management of infrastructure as well.
We must improve asset management and financial management.
Councils that plan and manage their assets effectively are councils that can deliver value for money to their communities. 
The quality and transparency of financial management varies greatly across different local governments.
Successive reports have noted difficulties in obtaining the level of information necessary to calculate the level of local infrastructure investment that is now needed to renew and replace existing infrastructure assets.
We need to know what we've got, what condition it is in, whether it needs to be repaired and how much it costs to maintain. 
This is the most basic level of information.
All States and Territories have agreed to adopt and implement nationally consistent financial and asset management and planning frameworks for local government developed by the Local Government and Planning Ministers' Council. 
But implementation has been patchy.
Where appropriate, the Government will consider making resources available for a long term reform fund to support councils as they improve their asset management and financial plans. 
The Commonwealth will also consider making its future infrastructure investments linked to the implementation of nationally consistent asset management systems.
This is good public policy. 
And it will provide the Commonwealth with the confidence necessary to provide further support in the future.
Next year at the ACLG I would like to be having a discussion about infrastructure needs that is informed by an agreed set of information based on council asset and financial management plans. 
That discussion should not be one that looks back, but one that looks forward.
Councils need to identify their asset needs for the coming years.
Successful businesses plan their capital expenditure over decades, not months  -  and so should governments. 
Next year at the ACLG I would like to be having a discussion that looks at our infrastructure needs for the next decades and beyond.
We should not be focussed just on fixing or replacing what we have.
We need to focus on laying the foundations for the future.
This is particularly important in our high growth areas. 
Infrastructure takes time to build.
Working with States and Territories, local governments need to predict where we will need infrastructure in five or ten years' time and get started on it now.
The Commonwealth will also support steps to improve the utilisation of infrastructure and service delivery  -  including options for shared services, joint purchasing or sharing of resources and expertise as ways to capture the benefits of scale economies. 
The Commonwealth can also help local government in achieving economies of scale.
The Australian Government is currently introducing coordinated contracting arrangements for common areas of procurement, with a view to getting better value for money for Commonwealth departments and agencies. 
Once these coordinated contracts are established, the Commonwealth will examine the options for local governments to take advantage of these arrangements as well, to help reduce costs and improve outcomes for local ratepayers.
Our starting point in our nation-building partnership with local government is a dedicated Regional and Local Community Infrastructure Program to address the needs of local communities.
In May this year we announced that this fund will commence in 2009-10.
However, in light of economic conditions and the urgent need for investment in community infrastructure, we have decided to bring forward this investment.
That is why today I am pleased to announce that we will make immediate provision for $300 million to local governments through the Regional and Local Community Infrastructure Program.
And by immediate, I mean immediate.
It means now.
It's ready to go now.
This funding is the next phase of our economic stimulus strategy for the nation.
This purpose of this action is to build local infrastructure and help support local economies and jobs during the global financial crisis.
We expect that the Regional and Local Community Infrastructure Program will create thousands of jobs  -  for tradespeople, engineers, and administrators who are in charge of rolling-out our new infrastructure or repairing existing infrastructure.
This initial $300 million injection into the program will be delivered by 30 June 2009 in two programs.
$250 million will be allocated to each council and shire, based on a formula that recognises need and population growth, but with a minimum allocation of $100,000.
We expect this funding to be allocated to new initiatives to repair and build community facilities  -  initiatives that are over and above those already planned and budgeted.
Those initiatives might include upgrades to local sporting grounds, refurbishing a community centre or local pool, upgrading a streetscape, building a tourism information centre or building an indoor sports centre.
To claim their allocation, councils will be required to submit proposals that are ready-to-go and meet program guidelines.
Second, the Commonwealth will invite bids for a further $50 million to be invested in larger-scale local projects such as new sports stadiums, entertainment precincts and cultural centres that require a larger Commonwealth contribution  -  $2 million or more. 
With these investments, we aim to leverage greater investment such as from States or groups of local governments, to deliver a stronger economic boost to local communities.
Local governments have the capacity to roll-out smaller-scale infrastructure projects quickly.
We will be asking local government to implement a speedy rollout of infrastructure investment to deliver both immediate economic benefits and long-term community benefits.
Monies from both funds will need to be expended by the end of September next year.
Improved workforce capability is also critically important to building the effective 21st century local government.
Skill shortages are especially acute in local government management, engineering and urban planning.
Attracting and retaining skilled local government staff, ensuring the ongoing training and development of local government personnel and establishing local government as an employer of choice are significant challenges for local government.
This problem has been recognised at the state level, and state governments are undertaking valuable work in collaboration with state-based local government associations and the Local Government Managers of Australia.
However, across Australia there is lack of coordination and uptake of these training opportunities which address local government skill needs.
It will always be the primary responsibility of local governments, and States and Territories working with local governments, to ensure that local governments have the skilled professionals they need.
However, the Commonwealth can take steps to support and enhance the professionalism of local government.
That is why today I am pleased to announce that the Australian Government will contribute up to $8 million in funding for a new centre for excellence for local government.
The Australian Government will provide an endowment to showcase innovation and best practice across local government and encourage the wider adoption of innovative practices and solutions. 
We will shortly run a competitive process to identify the best candidate university or other provider for this centre.
We intend this to be based in a university, but delivered virtually as well as physically to maximise access across all of Australia's 565 local authorities.
This funding will also contribute to the development of specialist local government leadership programs that will enhance the profile of the sector and contribute to its capability through its workforce.
This is an important reform for the future.
In closing let me make a couple of remarks about today's program.
First, I want to acknowledge the substantial work that has been done ahead of today's conference by the Minister for Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development and Local Government, Anthony Albanese, and by his department.
There's no doubting Albo's commitment to local government.
Indeed, his passion for local government goes right back to his first job in politics, working for Tom Uren, the architect of the Whitlam Government's urban development agenda, and local government minister in the Hawke Government in the 1980s. 
Second, the program that's been put together for today is intended to give you the opportunity to focus on matters of greatest relevance to your local community.
The break-out sessions have been structured to address specific challenge in infrastructure, productive cities, local government efficiency, regional communities, local environments, constitutional recognition, housing affordability, social inclusion and Indigenous engagement.
I want today's discussions to be the beginning of a new partnership  -  a partnership that can bring together the expertise and experience of local governments across the nation with the Commonwealth.
But it is only a beginning.
If we succeed together it will be one long step forward in reforming the Federation  -  and ending the blame game that has plagued our nation in its first century, a blame game that should have no place in our second century when the challenges the nation faces are far too great to ignore for any longer.


On this day 67 long years ago 645 Australians gave their lives in defence of their nation.
On 19 November 1941 HMAS Sydney was lost with all lives.
Prime Minister Curtin announced the news to a stunned nation on 30 November.
Mourning the “loss of a fine ship and her gallant complement” stating that “the people of Australia will be proud that she and they upheld the traditions of the Royal Australian Navy and completed a glorious career in successful action against the enemy.”
Curtin later continued that they, the crew of the Sydney, “had rendered to this nation the full measure of their devotion”.
The War Cabinet had met the days previous hoping against hope that survivors would be found. But there would be none.
When the War Cabinet met and agreed that day on what was to be done, they resolved also that the name would live on in the Royal Australian Navy.
The War Cabinet agreed that day that there will always be a Sydney and so it has been.
HMAS Sydney was the pride of the fleet. She had earned her battle honours in a distant and ancient sea in the battle of the Mediterranean.
Her lines were beautiful. Her men, well seasoned. Her captains bold.
She had returned home to a hero's welcome when the world still seemed dark and the victories few, victories that could nourish a nation's soul through war.
Through Sydney's streets they marched as heroes. The city embraced the ship that bore her name and then towards work again to stand guard at our nation's sea lanes to Suez.
And the rest is tragedy.
A tragedy that seared the nation's soul, both then and down the tunnels of time. Families shattered, mothers grieving, fathers silent, brothers, sister ashen. Newlywed wives left staring uncomprehendingly with a grief unspeakable.
Their children, little children, were left for a lifetime wondering why.
And then there were their mates, some still with us today, and wondering still why they were spared that last, final and fateful voyage.
And let us also remember today the men who lost their lives on the Kormoran for they were men too with mothers and fathers, sisters and brothers, children, families all.
And now, they have been found. These two great, grey ships of the deep, now silent sepulchres of the sea. Great tombs of our nation's dead.
What would the brave souls of the Sydney say to us today?
Because death is the unwelcome guest that one day greets us all.
I believe they would say it is well to have died...
I believe they would say it is well to have died for the highest human cause  -  not just the defence of the nation, but the defence also of the idea that had given this new nation birth, barely a generation before.
 And that idea was freedom. Freedom is little discussed in our current age. Perhaps it is because freedom is something we know from its absence rather than its presence.
But when since the war we have seen millions upon millions coming to these shores in search of freedom: freedom to pursue their lives, freedom to pursue their faiths, freedom to pursue their commerce.
We know from this fact, that Sydney's work has been work well done.
And that is the further message to us today, from the men of Sydney.
In a word, it is vigilance. There are those who would wish the enemies of freedom away, would that it were so, but it is not. We cannot build castles in the air.
We are a practical people. We must therefore be prepared to defend the peace and across the vast theatres of the world, prosecute the peace, when others would threaten it. And to do so with our friends and allies and our partners, and through the great councils of the United Nations.
And so we will continue to build great ships like Sydney as the symbols and the substance of our strength and so speak plainly of our capacity and our resolve to act, should the time come.
What finally would the warriors of Sydney say to us today at this the dawn of our pacific century?
I believe they would also say this, be warriors for peace.
I believe they would cry as one, may there be no more wars.
I will believe they would say to our peoples our diplomats and our statesman, let us strain every sinew, not only to preserve the peace, as if war was somehow our natural human condition, but to build together a new habit, a new culture, a new practice of peace for the future.
We face a new century where much is uncertain, where we could once again slip into old, bad and destructive habits.
Or we could do something entirely new:
Fashioning a truly united nations;
Building on the habits of cooperation;
Resolving to work for the common good and so confronting the great common challenges of our age which now bear down so greatly on us all.
But beyond all these great things, this day, this Memorial Day, this 67th Anniversary of the lost of this great ship, is about the 645 souls lost to the love and to the embrace of their families.
To you, the brothers, the sisters, the sons, the daughters, the grandchildren, the families and the communities who love them and who gave them nurture, and to  you their mates, a grateful nation today says thank you.
For Australia is a greater nation for them, for their service and for their sacrifice.


Thank you Ross (Babbage), for that wonderful exercise in expectation management. ‘You've spent 25 years of your career preparing for this speech tonight.' I'll pay you back big time mate.
Ross actually was one of my teachers at the Strategic Defence Studies Centre at the Australian National University and upon election to this office I asked him to shred all of my university assignments and he's done so. So my thanks to him and why he can treat me with such cavalier disregard.
To my good friend Ambassador Rich Armitage, who has given me heaps over about 15 years and when he's been in power and not in power, but Rich, I regard you as a long, enduring friend of Australia and it's great to have you with us here today.
To Ambassador Robert McCallum, where is the Ambassador, I saw him here I think earlier on. Robert is coming to the conclusion of his assignment here in Canberra and could I publicly use this occasion, when we have so many Americans with us in the room, to acknowledge his contribution to the Australia-United States relationship and alliance.
Robert, you go from this country with us as Australians knowing that you are a true friend of Australia and a great supporter of this alliance and we thank you for your work.
Also in the room tonight we have my good friend Stanley Roth, former Assistant Secretary of State for East Asia in the Clinton Administration. We have also Lieutenant -General Fraser, Deputy Commander US Pacific Command and thank you General Fraser for the hospitality you and Admiral Keating showed me and my party when you recently spent some time at PACOM in Honolulu.
Greg Combet, Parliamentary Secretary for Defence Procurement, Air Chief-Marshall Angus Houston, Chief of the Australian Defence Force, Michael L'Estrange, Secretary of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, Peter Varghese, Director General of the Office of National Assessments, the Honourable Kim Beazley, good to have you with us here Kim, Chancellor-elect of the Australian National University, a great Australian national institution and leading members one and all of the Australia-US security policy community.
Firstly, I should apologise now for interrupting your dinner so early and delivering this address at the time that I'm so doing and the reason is I'm about to head out the door and head off to Lima in Peru for APEC.
Normally, I'd be leaving tomorrow morning but there is industrial action in Papeete. Papeete is normally the place where we would refuel. I'm reliably informed that because of the industrial action on the part of trade unionists in Papeete, we could safely land the Royal Australian Air Force aircraft on which I'll be travelling but not necessarily take off again, which could lead to some embarrassment if I was in fact in Tahiti for the three days that I was supposed to be in Peru for APEC.
So that's why you have me now, speaking, because I literally zip out the door and jump onto an aircraft to travel to Lima via Honolulu, via Acapulco, in order to land in Lima on time. Think of me.
It's great to be here also at an institution which is named after Kokoda. For Americans who are with us tonight, Kokoda holds a particular significance. Many will be familiar with it, as I know Rich and others are. Others who may be visitors for the first time with us may be less familiar.
It is a story, rich in Australian heroism, rich in an Australian attitude of absolute defiance and rich in the story of us inflicting the first defeat on land to the Imperial Japanese army in the Second World War. And for us therefore it holds particular significance.
At a personal level, I actually walked the Kokoda Track a few years ago. For those of you who have not done it before can I say you are very sensible.
The Kokoda Track is 93 kilometres over the Owen-Stanley Ranges and it is as horrible now to walk as it was back then.
I walked it with a team of people, without a rifle on my shoulder and without even a pack on my back and it nearly killed me.
It is an extraordinary piece of terrain. We did so in the end of a monsoonal season. By the time we got to the end we had developed, all of us practically in our team, the 21st century equivalent of footrot, or trench rot, which as you know  -  sorry, you're eating at this stage  -  which as you know was endemic across many of the trenches in the Western Front in the First World War.
By the end a number of us had feet which had swollen up to be the size of footballs, mine included, and they were not a pretty sight to see. In fact, they had swollen up so large that it was impossible to wear shoes.
My complication was the afternoon after concluding the walk at Popendetta and then flying back to Moresby I was due, as Shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs, for a meeting with the Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea, Sir Michael Somare.
Sir Michael, as you may know, usually wears sandals but I then walked into his office wearing socks and no shoes. He looked at me, looked at the shoes, looked at the non-existence of shoes, looked at my socks, looked at the size of my feet, and said ‘Kokoda'. I said ‘Yeah' and he said ‘You silly European bastard'.
He was right.
Can I say to our American friends who are here this evening, you are genuinely welcome guests in our country.
This engagement with our friends across the Pacific, our allies and partners across the Pacific goes back a long, long time and it is given continued vitality by the continued presence of so many of you who engage with so many of us in all dimensions of the security policy relationship between us.
We value that. We valued it in the past. We value it now and we will value it in the future. Because this, for the Government of Australia and the people of Australia, is for us the most critical relationship. And so you are welcome.
The Australia-US Alliance is a relationship reflecting the deep and enduring interests of both our nations.
It is an alliance whose long-term operation transcends any partisan divide.
It is also an alliance which has survived 13 Presidents, 12 Australian Prime Minister, Republic and Democrat, Labor and Liberal, and it has flourished, and it continues to do so.
It is also in Australia's view an alliance that has helped underpin the security and stability of the wider region.
Through its network of alliances in our region, the US presence in the Western Pacific has been a force for stability for more than half a century.
As I said to President-elect Obama when I spoke to him to congratulate him on his election victory, Australia is looking forward to further strengthening our relationship with the United States in the future.
A strong and enduring US Alliance will contribute and continue to be the basis for our close security cooperation with his Administration, as it has been with all US Administrations for the last 60 years and more.
I very much welcome President-elect Obama's commitment in his foreign policy plan to forging a more effective framework in Asia and working to build an infrastructure with East Asian countries that can promote stability and prosperity for the future.
Australia looks forward to working with the Obama Administration:
     * on the ongoing coordinated response to the global financial crisis;
     * on the long-term political, economic, and strategic architecture of the Asia-Pacific region;
     * on the great and enduring challenge of nuclear non-proliferation; and
     * on the great challenge also of climate change, which is of major relevance to our region with the rise of China and with the rise of India.
These are challenges we intend to embrace together, Australia and the United States, and I look forward to doing so.
The Asia-Pacific region will in the 21st century increasingly become the focus of a global shift in the centre of geo-strategic and geo-economic gravity.
I look forward very much to working with the Obama Administration in the future  -  just as Australia has worked closely on the great challenges that lie ahead with President Bush's Administration in the past.
The theme for this year's conference goes to the heart of Australia's interests.
Put simply, what goes on in the Western Pacific is vital to Australia's enduring interests.
History makes this point very clearly.
In 1941 and 1942, the direct security threat to Australia  -  the first we had faced as a nation  -  came to us across the Western Pacific.
The Western Pacific became the battleground on which we fought for our national survival. And our partner in that fight, our ally in that fight, was the United States of America, something Australia will never forget.
For Australian policy makers, the geo-politics of the Western Pacific and our relationship with the United States have always been intimately linked.
And today it is no different.
The Western Pacific still contains potential military flashpoints that could have enormous ramifications for Australia.
The Taiwan Straits have not gone simply gone away, they are still there and they do represent a potential source for instability in the future.
We welcome recent moves towards better relations between China and Taiwan.
But the Taiwan Strait remains highly militarised and the core political disagreements between China and Taiwan still today remain unresolved.
The Korean Peninsula too is home to unresolved tensions.
North Korea maintains one of the largest armies in the world. And it has sought to develop nuclear weapons.
The armistice at the 38th parallel has held for 55 years but the fact that no peace treaty has been signed reflects the ongoing tension.
We also face a range of other security policy challenges here in our own region.
International terrorism is far from defeated and we must maintain our vigilance.
Terrorism may be out of the newspapers for a while, terrorism continues to be a threat to us all and we must maintain vigilance.
Fragile states face internal security threats and require our support.
We face a complex range of security challenges in our region therefore.
For the first time in the nation's history, this Government will soon deliver a national security statement to the Parliament.
This document will provide a conceptual framework for dealing with the complexity, the density and the interconnectedness of the security policy challenges Australia now faces.
The document will bring greater discipline to the way we approach national security policy at all levels of government and across the full dimensions of the threat spectrum.
Sitting under the national security statement we will have a series of other guiding documents.
The Defence White Paper will be delivered in the first half of 2009.
The Government has made it clear that it will require a comprehensive White Paper.
The White Paper will set out the strategic terrain we foresee for the region and beyond.
And we want a White Paper that addresses all of the defence enabling capabilities  -  such as personnel, IT, logistics, and facilities  -  which are also critical to ensuring military success.
In addition, the Government has made it clear what we expect to see a White Paper as being, namely, properly costed.
We want a properly costed resource plan that covers major capability projects, and the critical support areas that I mentioned.
The White Paper will outline how we propose to structure our defence forces to meet those challenges for the long-term future and it will outline how we fix any gaps in the short term.
It will be a long-term planning document that will bring new discipline to our defence capability planning.
And I would like to say again tonight to this audience that this will include a particular emphasis on the maritime capabilities that will become increasingly important in our strategic environment in the Asia Pacific region over the period of the White Paper.
At the same time as planning for our long-term defence needs, we are strengthening our defence cooperation with crucial partners in our region.
Enhancing our security and defence cooperation has been a key theme of my visits recently to Japan, the Republic of Korea, Indonesia, Malaysia and Singapore.
We in Australia intend to deepen our defence cooperation with these countries. We have also proposed to enhance our security cooperation with India and our security policy dialogue with China. These are important friends and partners for the future.
Australia's long-term national security also hinges on our long-term economic security.
The Global Financial Crisis is an important reminder of the close links between economics and security.
The Western Pacific will be the leading centre of global change in the 21st century.
The region's economic weight is increasing rapidly. This economic growth, this economic weight is driving substantial changes in strategic weight.
The challenge for all nations in the region is to cooperate effectively to manage the economic and security changes and challenges that are now unfolding.
It will take some time for the full effects of the crisis to be felt.
But unless we handle this crisis effectively on both a global and regional basis, it has the potential to increase the fragility of some of the economies of the region and to reduce their ability to respond to the challenges that lie ahead.
History should be our teacher.
That is why the common resolve of the G20 recently convened in Washington to shun protectionism and to embrace free trade is a positive sign for the future.
We now know that closing our borders is a counter-productive approach to economic problems such as the global financial crisis.
But history also highlights the need for a coordinated global response to such crises.
President Bush's initiative in convening the G20 Summit was important, positive and necessary.
But the Washington Summit is but the first step in a long process of global economic recovery.
The crisis needs to be addressed through determined, coordinated and positive action in the critical months that lie ahead.
G20 leaders have laid down a clear path to help us weather the current crisis to prevent this type of crisis from happening again, and by acting on the demands of the real economy.
The statistics of the G20 speak for themselves. These members account for 80 per cent of world trade, 85 per cent of the world's banking system, 85 per cent of global gross national product.
But the importance of this group is more than just the statistics would suggest.
It brings together for the first time in a formal forum, developed and emerging economies. It brings together the critical economies and nations of the Americas, North and South, from Europe and from Asia.
Its strategic economic weight and its representative nature provide the G20 with potential for real long term authority. Of great importance for Australia and for the United States is that the G20 also includes key partners in Asia.
China and India as two emerging economic giants must be part of solutions to global economic and financial challenges, they must be a formal part of the solution, the considered solution to global economic and financial challenges.
It no longer makes sense for them not to be so. So too must Japan, still the world's second largest economy. South Korea also has an important role to play. It is a major exporting nation and a country that has weathered the 1997 Asian Financial Crisis and has come out stronger.
Indonesia is a voice for South East Asia in the G20, in addition to being the largest Muslim country in the world.
What this means is that alongside Australia, these nations give our region a greater voice in the affairs of the global economy and beyond.
There will be another Summit by the end of April next year to confirm the action agenda agreed in Washington. With the increasing economic importance of the Asia Pacific Region, the G20 will provide a continuing forum for the countries of the Asia Pacific to craft the international responses to the financial crisis and the impact on the real economy.
Coming as it does just a week after the G20 Summit, the APEC economic leaders meeting in Lima provides a further opportunity for APEC economies to commit to the actions agreed to in Washington.
APEC has always demonstrated an ability to respond to new challenges that threaten its core objectives of trade and investment liberalisation.
The crisis and the international response is already at the top of the APEC leaders' agenda.
As a group of economies accounting for more than half of global GDP and around half of world trade, APEC is well placed to provide political and practical support to the consensus reached on the crisis in Washington.
APEC can also assist by staying focussed on removing barriers to trade across the region and beyond.
Australia has been a leading proponent of the removal of trade barriers in our region.
And Australia will continue to emphasise the importance of free and open trade.
The international community must at every level work together to ensure responses to events such as the global financial crisis do not include any resort to protectionism nor undercut efforts toward economic growth and development in the region.
Regionally, the Bogor Goals of removing trade and investment barriers in developed countries by 2010 and developing countries by 2020 remain the clearest commitment of APEC leaders to open markets across the region.
And Australia has demonstrated its commitment to the goals of free trade through the negotiation of free trade agreements with a range of economies throughout the region.
On top of our free trade agreements with the United States, New Zealand, Thailand and Singapore, we signed a free trade agreement with Chile in July this year.
We are actively negotiating Free Trade Agreements with Japan and with China.
When I met President Hu Jintao in Washington on Sunday, we agreed to adopt a fresh approach to speeding up the conclusion of this agreement.
And we are both committed to achieving a high-quality outcome as soon as we can.
We have finalised an ASEAN-Australia-New Zealand Free Trade Agreement which covers a combined market of around 600 million people with a total GDP of more than two trillion US dollars.
FTAs can boost trade by expanding the size of the market that exporters have good access to.
When you look at the size of the combined market we have delivered though all of our FTAs taken together, it amounts to nearly 30 per cent of global GDP.
If we succeed with China and Japan, the size of that market reaches around 45 per cent of global GDP.
And we are committed to promoting APEC's agenda on regional economic integration and continuing on the path towards a Free Trade Agreement of the Asia Pacific.
These developments are important, and bilateral and regional free trade agreements are a valuable means of achieving significant trade liberalisation outcomes.
But it is important to note that an ambitious outcome from trade liberalisation negotiations through the WTO remains the best way to bring about trade liberalisation that has the greatest positive impact on the global economy.
The reinvigoration of the Doha Round of trade negotiations will be an important basis of economic growth by helping promote a free and open global trading regime.
And Australia remains strongly committed to achieving an outcome from these negotiations.
I was very pleased that the G20 Summit agreed to the goal of reaching a new global trade agreement by the end of 2008.
This is ambitious but we must work for it.
And Australia will be working to encourage cooperation toward the successful conclusion of the Round.
And at a time of global financial crisis and global economic crisis, there could be no better outcome for the global economy than to achieve a Doha Free Trade outcome for the world.
As a striking example of the interdependence of nations and the interconnectedness of the challenges we face, the global financial crisis highlights the need for coordinated responses and coordinated approaches to dealing with problems.
We need to ensure that we have a regional architecture that can drive regional cooperation to meet existing and emerging challenges.
Regular dialogue across all areas of government and at all levels will be essential to positioning the region to address the range of security and economic challenges which we are set to face.
Challenges such as:
     *  Managing the geostrategic changes taking place in our region;
     *  Responding to threats such as terrorism and natural disasters and emerging challenges such as food and resource security;
     *  Maintaining and building on free, open trading regimes; and
     *  Acting together on climate change.
The development of ASEAN is a great example of how regional organisations can contribute to security and stability.
ASEAN was created at the height of the Cold War when the future of the region was much less than certain.
The South-East Asia of the 1960s had been divided by the conflict in Indochina.
It was a group of countries with few substantive ties and diverse, in fact, conflicting political, social, religious, cultural systems.
Today, ASEAN has helped forge a sense of community across what remains a diverse region.
Through building a dialogue, ASEAN has developed cooperation, rather than confrontation, as the driver of responses to new challenges the region faces.
And it has played a crucial role in maintaining peace in the region.
This experience illustrates the importance of pre-emptively shaping our future environment to position the region to address future challenges, and highlights the need for us to develop strong institutions which foster trust and cooperation to underpin peace and stability.
This is a key factor driving this Government's proposal for an Asia-Pacific Community.
Through this we have started a constructive dialogue on the development of a broad-ranging, effective forum for engagement between regional countries.
I am pleased that the initial consultations in the region of my Special Envoy for the Asia Pacific Community, Richard Woolcott, have gone well. More discussions will occur.
As I outlined in my address to the Asia Society in June, this will be a gradual process. And this is as it should be.
Our ambition remains to create an Asia-Pacific Community by 2020.
And that is a single pan-regional body that brings together the United States, China, India, Indonesia, Japan and the other countries of the region with a broad agenda to deal with the political, economic and security challenges of the future.
As we know, no such body in the region does that at present, either by dint of its membership or by dint of its agreed agenda. It is time we moved towards such a body.
The challenge will be to determine the best option for the development of such a body which best meets the interests of the region.
I will be discussing the proposal further with leaders in Lima this weekend.
Our discussions will continue in capitals as well in the year ahead.
And my Special Envoy will be looking to consult with the new US Administration at the earliest opportunity.
For this concept, the Asia Pacific Community, to succeed, ASEAN must be at its core. And we look forward to continued dialogue with our ASEAN friends on its final constitution.
The Western Pacific is a dynamic environment. The geo-political terrain is shifting.
The economic character is changing as new powerhouse economies emerge.
It is the emerging centre of the climate change agenda.
The challenges this presents highlight the need for cooperative responses to developments in the region, and the importance of shaping our future environment by developing mechanisms to address these challenges.
Australia and the United States are well placed to work together in this region.
We are well placed to do so bilaterally given the strength, depth and breadth of the defence and security relationship between us. We are well placed to do so multilaterally through the institutions which exist and those which we may one day form together.
Australia and the United States have shared values. Australia and the United States have shared interests. Australia and the United States have a shared future.
May our common resolve be to build an Asia Pacific century that does not repeat the errors of the European century of the one past  -  one characterised by national conflict and international conflict; but instead a century that by dint of our efforts together is truly peaceful, truly pacific, prosperous and sustainable for all the peoples of our region.
QUESTION:I noticed Prime Minister in your comments tonight you renewed your commitment to the regional initiative that you announced to the Asia Society in June. What I would like to do is to ask you, wouldn't it be more advantageous to look at this in terms of modification and adaption of existing institutions rather than attempting to create a new institution?
PM:Paul on the question of the future shape of an Asia Pacific Community, we in the Australian Government remain completely open. The one principle is that ASEAN should be at its core. And I think our friends in ASEAN have demonstrated the remarkable achievement of converting what was a significant region of conflict into a significant region of cooperation.
If you think back to the ‘60s and the divisions between communist Indochina and what was happening in the rest of South East Asia, it is extraordinary that 40 years later, these states, these countries are together in the same organisation and, 
despite difficulties from time to time, working and speaking together, by and large with a single voice.
On the form which this may take, subject to open discussions with our friends in the neighbourhood, that is, whether in the future an Asia Pacific Region, an Asia Pacific Community takes within its umbrella the future functions of APEC, that is matter for what our friends and partners in the region may think.
Whether it has a wider capacity to become a further iteration of other regional bodies, that is a matter for our friends and partners in the region. My interest is not the question of substitution or innovation. My interest is this, to encourage now a regional dialogue on how do we go about drawing the threads together of our pan regional cooperation in order to encourage and institutionalise the habits of cooperation across the policy spheres.
At present as you know APEC deals with an exclusively economic agenda and as you know the other bodies currently exclude the United States. I would like to see a pan regional body which includes America and which is also capable of embracing a wide policy agenda which covers the breadth of our interconnectedness - political, economic and security in the future.
But Paul at the end of the day it will be shaped by the dialogue and the discussion. And because the endpoint that we have established is a 2020 objective, there is plenty of time to do that. But Dick Woolcott, my Special Envoy, has been busy.
He has been around most capitals in the region but not all so far. And that process of discussion will continue for some time.
QUESTION:Prime Minister Peter Nicholson, of the Kokoda Foundation. You spoke about the abnormal influence that the economic present financial crisis, and the economic weight that is going on now and the means of dealing with it through the G20 but particularly its impact on the fragility of other regional economies.
Could you outline the kinds of mechanisms you might see that we can prop up these economies or stimulate them in the same way that you are doing in Australia and is happening in other national economies?
PM: I think the great thing is that right now the Bretton Woods institutions are playing a very strong role, both the Fund and the Bank recently in discussions with both Dominique Strauss-Kahn who heads the Fund and Bob Zoellick who heads the Bank, indicates the sort of proactive actions they are taking. The Bank in particular is very active in this space and I would commend publicly Bob Zoellick's leadership on this. Basic things like how you deal with trade financing challenges, basic things like how you deal with immediate demands for development.
And as for the fund, of course, particular challenges which might arise on the external accounts of various emerging economies.
On this challenge, I think our two principal Bretton Woods institutions are doing a good job. We the rest of the international community should get behind them and it was pleasing to see most recently the government of Japan extending such significant support to the work of these institutions in the future.
And that will be increasingly required by a number of developed economies as this crisis unfolds across more fragile economies in the developing world.
QUESTION:As you can imagine, there's a cottage industry going on in Washington on transition papers for the incoming administration. It's easier on Asia policy  - 
PM:When I was in Washington on the weekend, Stanley, it looked like an industrial combine at work.
QUESTION:Fair enough. Easier on Asia policy than many other areas because there have been so many successes in Asia policy in the last eight years, this coming from a former Democrat political appointee. But there has been a perception that the bilateral policy had been more successful than the regional policies, and particularly in South-East Asia, a lot of angst - ‘is the US engaged, are we focussed entirely on the Middle East. Are we looking out for them and their institutions? Are they going to have to accommodate with China?'
A couple of practical ideas coming out, such as, (inaudible) new ones, joining the ASEAN summit, the annual event, convening an ASEAN Honolulu conference, the one that was aborted in particular, those two institutional changes. What would your view be about those two proposals?
PM: I suppose my first view would be not to provide public advice to the incoming US administration because the transition arrangements in Washington are deep, complex and mysterious and will have their resolution as we all know, on the 20th of January.
Can I say this though, looking carefully at what President-elect Obama has said about the important of the Pacific to his presidency. We in Australia are encouraged. We think that will build in important ways on the Pacific engagement of the Bush presidency.
Let me make one remark about the United States' engagement with China over the last eight years. I've said this before privately, and I'll say it today publicly.
I think an outstanding success of the Bush Administration has been the way it's managed the China relationship in what could have gone radically in the wrong direction and I think it speaks well of the outgoing administration in terms of our interests and stability in this region.
And that is a good platform from which to build.
Secondly, part of the purpose of my remarks tonight was to underline the importance of not just maintaining strengthening the fabric of our bilateral security and defence policy engagements between the US, its friends and partners in the region and Australia separately doing the same, but also to work together on developing further the habits of multilateral cooperation.
As I said, ASEAN does stand out as something of an example of what could be done and certainly one of the areas where I wish to engage early with the incoming US administration is on what we can do more broadly across the region, hence our proposal for an Asia-Pacific community, and hence why we wish to engage our American friends in due season on that.
But I'm very mindful of how thick the in-tray is in DC these days. 


When the Government was elected just one year ago, we committed to building a modern Australia equipped to face the challenges of the 21st century. 
In our first year in office we have been delivering on that commitment.
Just a few of our achievements include:
Cut taxes in the last budget for working families and low income earners;
Starting our education revolution by building Trade Training Centres in high schools and installing new computers in nearly 1000 schools;
Abolishing the previous Government's extreme workplace laws;
Implementing the Water for the Future plan to restore the health of the Murray Darling Basin and securing our future urban water supplies with funding to build desalination, water recycling and rainwater harvesting projects;
We have ratified the Kyoto Protocol and signed Australia up to international action to tackle climate change;
And we are introducing a $480 million dollar national solar schools program to encourage schools to switch to solar power.
We are establishing over 1000 new training places for nurses and providing incentives to encourage thousands of nurses who are out of the workforce to return to work, because we need them.
By the end of the year we will have held nine community cabinets across the country as part of our commitment to hear people's ideas and concerns first hand, wherever they live.
And we have said sorry to Indigenous Australian on behalf of the Australian Parliament.
But you know? This is just the start. 
Australia now faces the worst financial crisis since the 1930s and we've taken early and decisive action to protect our economy and to protect Australian jobs and business.
We guaranteed all depositors and all deposits in all Australian banks, building societies and credit unions for the next three years.
We invested $10.4 billion into the economy to stimulate economic activity and to support jobs.
And we are bringing forward investment in major infrastructure like rail, roads and ports to boost economic activity for the long term.
Together we will steer our economy through these rough waters and at the same time deliver on our commitments to take Australia confidently forward into the future.
Thank you for listening.
A video of this speech is also available.  The Goverment's One Year Progress Report is also available.


Since the end of the Cold War nearly 20 years ago, the world has entered a new era of economic globalisation.
This new era of economic globalisation has also unfolded at the dawn of the Asia-Pacific century.
The facts speak for themselves: the global centre of geo-economic and geo-strategic gravity is shifting to the Asia-Pacific region.
Our century has come but with it comes grave responsibilities:
     * to preserve peace;
     * to build security;
     * to widen prosperity; and
     * to act on climate change.
We have entered a new age of global and regional interdependence.
This age has brought great opportunities.
Capital, ideas, technology, services and products flow around the world creating jobs and delivering better prices to consumers.
But this age of interdependence also brings great challenges.
If one part of the global system experiences difficulty, it quickly flows to other parts.
That's why we need to make sure that the global financial and economic system is sustainable  -  through good times and bad.
In our region we need stability between nations.
We also need economic stability.
And we need long-term sustainable development.
These are all interconnected.
Sustainable political and economic structures require a sustainable environment.
All of this can only be achieved if governments in our region work together with a degree of cooperation and coordination unprecedented in our history.
And in doing so, we need to partner with the business community to develop our policy responses  -  both short and long term  -  to the great challenges that lie ahead.
The global financial crisis is now having a clear and immediate effect on real economies, real growth and real jobs around the world.
Already, in little more than a year, the financial crisis has caused the loss of nearly half of the wealth held on global stock markets.
And is expected to lead to a loss of 3 per cent of global GDP next year - that is $1.8 trillion.
For families it means lower living standards and frustrated ambitions.
It means the erosion of financial security for older people as their savings shrink.
It means a new generation of young people will find it more difficult to find their first job.
The ILO estimates that the numbers of jobless will rise to 210 million next year.
The impact will be felt in all nations  -  developed and developing.
A one percent decline in developing country growth rates will push an additional 20 million people into poverty.
The IMF is currently forecasting developing countries to grow at just over 5 per cent in 2009, down from 8 per cent in 2007.
That decline  -  of some 3 per cent  -  will condemn 60 million people to poverty.
As confidence across the world falls it begins a vicious cycle that leads to further caution on the part of households; leading to further falls in consumer spending; leading to further falls in business investment; leading to lower growth, and fewer new jobs generated.
But the test of political leadership is not simply to describe political events.
It is not to talk about them.
It is to act on them.
To act on them decisively.
And, where possible, to act ahead of the curve.
In other words, to make a difference.
This must be done nationally to support growth and jobs.
It must be done internationally.
The world must now act decisively to deal with the crisis we face.
The strength of open markets lies in its marriage of freedom and responsibility.
Freedom means that we are able to make economic decisions in our own interests unencumbered by excessive government restrictions.
Responsibility means ensuring that markets are properly regulated and that market participants support rather than undermine the integrity of the system.
But the origins of the current crisis lie in the largely unregulated sectors of our financial markets that brought out the absolute worst in the most extreme forms of capitalism.
And the consequences have not just been borne by those who abused the system.
It has been borne by the system itself, the real economy, and those whose jobs and standards of living depend on the orderly functioning of both for their livelihood.
As private demand falls, governments must step in to take up the slack.
This will require further monetary action.
And it will require fiscal action.
Nationally.
Internationally.
Coordinated.
And with urgency.
Many APEC members have already moved to boost their economies.
China has injected a massive 586 billion US dollars into its economy and that is a significant boost to the global economy.
Japan has announced a package of 68 billion US dollars.
The Korean Government has announced an 11 billion US dollar fiscal stimulus package of public expenditures and 3 trillion Won of tax cuts.
Indonesia has taken decisive action through both fiscal and monetary policy.
Australia has implemented a 7.7 billion US dollar Economic Security Strategy  -  equal to one per cent of GDP.
But more can be done.
Globally and regionally, more must be done.
Governments acting in isolation from one another cannot deal with all of the consequences of the crisis.
Nor can they hope to prevent such a crisis from happening again.
No country's economy is immune from the impact.
No country's labour force is immune from the impact.
This crisis will only be overcome by coordinated action.
President Bush's initiative in calling a Summit meeting of the Group of Twenty nations was the right response to the crisis.
The Group of Twenty  -  the G20  -  brings together the major economies in the world and the countries that have the greatest interest in and impact on the stability of the global financial system.
The members account for:
     * 80 per cent of world trade;
     * 85 per cent of the world's banking system; and
     * 85 per cent of global gross national product.
But the importance of this group is about more than the statistics.
It brings together developed and emerging economies.
It brings together five nations from the Americas, five from Europe, five from Asia and five from the rest of the world.
And while being a representative global body, it also reflects the increased economic might of the Asia-Pacific in the global deliberations of the 21st century.
In responding to the financial crisis and its effects, the G20 is also the most appropriate mechanism for the future.
And last weekend in Washington, we began to take some coordinated action.
We agreed on the need for countries to stabilise their financial systems.
We agreed that all countries would use fiscal measures to stimulate domestic demand.
More than the short term, we also agreed on the need for long-term changes to strengthen transparency, accountability and therefore the stability of the financial system.
     * Financial firms should be fully and accurately disclosing the level of risk in their products.
     * Capital adequacy regimes should be adequate to cope with the range of market fluctuations.
     * Financial executives should not be rewarded in the short term for excessive risk taking.
     * Incentive structures for financial firms should reward the building of sustainable business.
To make this effective and to prevent similar crises erupting in the future, we need national and regional regulators to implement consistent rules and regulations for the future.
The G20 meeting made a good start.
And it tasked ministers to develop a timeline to implement these commitments.
Leaders will meet again early next year to confirm implementation.
In the face of these challenges, the Australian economy remains strong.
Our financial sector is robust.
     * Australia has four out of the world's 12 remaining AA rated banks.
     * A recent World Economic Forum analysis listed Australia as the equal second highest of 144 countries in terms of the soundness of our banking institutions.
     * And since the government moved to guarantee deposits and wholesale funding, we have seen a material improvement in liquidity and narrowing of spreads.
Australia's real economy is currently holding up well.
     * Australia is one of the few advanced economies for which the IMF is forecasting positive growth in 2009.
     * Unemployment is near historic lows at 4.3 per cent.
     * And have continued to maintain a forecast budget surplus even after implementing our Economic Security Strategy.
Through the crisis, the Australian Government remains committed to our long term reform agenda.
We are continuing to invest in boosting Australia's long term productivity.
     * We are working to ensure that Australia has the best-skilled and best-educated workforce in the world.
     * We are lifting the administrative burdens on business through a deregulation program.
     * We are investing in building our infrastructure.
     * And we are working to realise the APEC goal of structural reform by tackling behind the border measures including trade facilitation, customs reform and harmonisation of product standards.
We are resolved through this agenda  -  to not only get through this crisis  -  but to emerge stronger for the future.
This provides a rational basis for optimism for the future rather than simply contributing to the now thriving boutique industry of doom and gloom  -  in turn becoming a self-fulfilling prophesy.
Throughout all of this, we are also committed to remaining one of the most open economies in the world.
We already have free trade agreements with the United States, New Zealand, Thailand and Singapore.
We signed a free trade agreement with Chile in July this year.
We have finalised an ASEAN-Australia-New Zealand Free Trade Agreement.
We are actively negotiating FTAs with Japan and China.
Yesterday we announced our decision to join the United States, New Zealand, Brunei, Singapore, Chile and Peru in negotiations for a Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement.
This agreement could lay the foundation for our long-term goal of a Free Trade Area of the Asia Pacific.
If we succeed in concluding all these agreements we will have linked ourselves to markets that represent over 45 per cent of global GDP.
Of course the continuation of global trade flows is critical now  -  not just for the future.
World Bank president Robert Zoellick said recently at the G20 Finance Ministers meeting in Brazil that world trade could decline in 2009  -  the first fall for 27 years.
Part of the reason for the disruption in trade is the dislocation of credit markets which has denied shippers access to short-term credit.
The World Trade Organization has estimated that up to 90 per cent of trade shipments use some form of trade finance  -  the WTO estimates that the current liquidity gap in trade finance is 25 billion dollars.
As the G20 Leaders noted last weekend, all nations need to do more to ensure credit is available to finance trade.
In this context the recent introduction of a new trade finance facility by the World Bank is particularly welcome.
There has been conjecture  -  in Australia and internationally  -  about the implications of the global financial crisis for another crucial global challenge  -  the challenge of climate change.
Some have said that the financial crisis means that governments should postpone acting on climate change.
The Australian Government does not share that view.
Climate change presents a very real threat to global economic growth, jobs and prosperity.
But we can significantly reduce the impact with ambitious global action to reduce emissions.
Taking strong and urgent action will help safeguard economic and environmental stability.
It will insure us against severe and possibly catastrophic consequences for our material wellbeing.
The Australian Government recently completed a major economic study of the costs of taking action on climate change.
This study shows that Australia and the world will continue to grow strongly while taking the action required to avert dangerous climate change.
The study also shows that earlier action pays dividends.
Countries that begin structural change earlier will have a head start.
They will have more time to adjust their infrastructure and industrial structure smoothly to a carbon constrained world, avoiding more disruptive change later.
Australia  -  and other countries that take early action to reduce emissions  -  will capture the emerging growth opportunities in new low emission technologies, products and services.
This is turn will generate new jobs in cleaner, greener economies of the future.
The alternative is inertia  -  and the real economic and environmental costs of inertia are incalculable.
The Australian Government's emission reduction policies will promote clarity and certainty for industry, and provide a firm foundation for investment and job creation in the future.
Action to reduce Australia's emissions is a necessary part of our response to climate change.
It is necessary, but not sufficient.
Action by all major emitters is required to avert dangerous impacts of climate change.
Even if developed countries reduce their emissions to zero, current trends in developing countries could see greenhouse gases in the atmosphere rise to 650 parts per million by 2050, and further after that.
As a result, global average temperatures would likely rise more than three degrees above pre-industrial levels.
This change would bring high risks of adverse and potentially massive consequences for the global environment and the global economy.
This highlights the need for an ambitious, broadly-based global agreement that includes all sources of emissions from all countries.
As a developed country, Australia is prepared to accept its responsibility.
We respect the aspiration of developing nations to secure their economic development and deliver rising living standards for their people.
For this reason, we need to move away from the developed versus developing country divide that characterises current approaches to climate change.
We are all in this together.
Australia is working in partnership with its developing country neighbours to support action on climate change and action on development in tandem.
Building on our long-standing and close relationship, Australia and Indonesia have forged an innovative climate change partnership that can be a model for others.
It is a model which takes a practical approach to reducing emissions from deforestation.
Under the Indonesia-Australia Forest Carbon Partnership, we are working together on practical on-the-ground activities that support Indonesia in developing policies and systems, including in carbon monitoring and assessment, to reduce emissions from deforestation.
Emissions from deforestation represent about 20 per cent of total global emissions  -  more than all emissions from the transport sector.
Market-based approaches are at the centre of this partnership.
Market-based approaches set a real dollar value on the carbon stored in forests.
As a result, they provide opportunities for economic development.
Sustainable forest management provides a path to a better economic future for people in many developing countries.
Australia and Indonesia will also work together in multilateral negotiations to support a market-based approach for deforestation under the United Nations Framework on Climate Change.
Cooperation between developing and developed countries, which involves concrete and decisive action to reduce emissions, can provide confidence that all countries will benefit from an effective global response to the challenge of climate change.
This must also occur between the world's largest emitters  -  China and the United States.
Any global agreement on climate change without their participation will be inadequate against the real task of reducing significantly global greenhouse gas emissions.
Australia, with a close relationship with both countries, intends to work closely with both Beijing and Washington to try to fashion the ingredients of a long-term agreed solution  -  incorporating US and Chinese actions consistent with the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities.
Governments and businesses in our region face short and long-term challenges.
We face challenges ahead in responding to the financial crisis and preventing such crises from occurring again.
We face challenges like climate change.
To respond to these challenges effectively in our fast changing region we need political stability.
We have come a long way since APEC was first established 20 years ago.
And the business community has been at the forefront of the evolving architecture of our region.
APEC has been successful in addressing economic and other challenges because it has had the business sector as a partner.
APEC has helped to build support for open trade and investment.
And it is these flows that have made our region the most dynamic in the world today.
But we also need to be thinking today about the shape of our region tomorrow.
We also need to shape the evolution of our regional institutions to meet the needs of tomorrow.
This is necessary because of the emerging economic integration of our region and the complexity and inter-connectedness of economic, political and strategic agendas we confront.
The region is already home to the world's two biggest economies  -  the United States and Japan.
The region is also home to the world's two biggest emerging economies  -  China and India.
Businesses on both sides of the Pacific now consider the region the primary sphere of interest.
To achieve ongoing growth, we have to have the right structures in place  -  not just for now, but also for the future.
APEC has helped to build support for economic and trade liberalisation and has built a strong sense of economic community across the Asia-Pacific region.
In addition, ASEAN has built a sense of community in South East Asia  -  a community that consults on the shared challenges and consults to manage emerging problems.
And bodies such as the East Asia Summit, the Six-Party Talks and the ASEAN Regional Forum are contributing to regional cooperation in a range of areas.
But we need to now think about the next 20 years and beyond.
The rapid changes taking place in our region are certain to throw up a myriad of economic, political and security and environmental challenges.
And we need to position the region to respond effectively to all of these challenges through a single forum that brings together regional countries such as the United States, China, India, Indonesia and Japan.
We need a forum that builds habits of cooperation and dialogue across the full range of regional challenges.
No current regional body fills that role fully.
In Australia's proposal for an Asia Pacific Community by 2020, we have sought to start a constructive dialogue on regional architecture to address future challenges.
I have appointed a Special Envoy, Dick Woolcott, to consult with governments, academics and the business community in the region about the future of this concept.
Mr Woolcott has already held many discussions and has presented me with an interim report.
And his report has made two things clear.
First, there is great interest in the region about the sort of institutions we need for the future.
We have for the last six months been engaging in a regional conversation with our friends and partners and inevitably there will be different perspectives along the way.
Second, thinking about the detail of how our region might evolve will continue to develop.
This conversation about the future of our region will take some time.
But it is an important conversation because in the future we will face a stark choice.
We can either let our region simply drift along.
Or we can choose to shape our region.
I believe we must choose actively to shape our region.
The habits of cooperation cannot simply be assumed.
They have to be crafted, encouraged and institutionalised across the full spectrum of our regional agenda.
The alternative is to allow things to slip  -  and to default into the familiar pattern of conflict that we have seen in centuries past.
It is not beyond our collective wisdom to craft something different.
And the first step in shaping our region's future is discussing where we are now and where as a region we want to be in little more than a decade's time.
This global financial crisis caused the world to deploy a new structure to deliberate and determine causes of action needed to stabilise global financial markets and to underpin the recovery of the real global economy.
Similarly, here in the Asia-Pacific region, we must begin our discussion on the new structure our region needs to deal with the challenges of the future.
Structures which bring together the major powers and major economies with smaller powers and smaller economies.
Structures also that have a capacity for flexibility to deal with the vast new and interconnected agenda we must all confront for the 21st century.
An agenda in which there is new and increasingly seamless connection between political relations, economic relations, strategic stability, human security, climate change.
The challenge for governments  -  like corporations  -  is to be thinking, planning and acting ahead of the curve.
If we do that in a cooperative, coordinated and decisive way, there is a rational basis for optimism.
We have shown that we can work together to achieve real results.
We now have to intensify that cooperation.
That for us at the dawn of this Pacific century represents a particular imperative for us all.


PM RUDD: Ladies and gentleman, this is an important day in the practical relationship between Australia and Indonesia. 
The people of Indonesia, the people of Australia, the people of the wider Asia-Pacific region are subject to natural disasters on an increasing scale.
Already many countries within our region are affected by earthquakes. And we see the impact of that in China, in Indonesia, the Philippines and other countries.
Also our region is subject to intense volcanic activity.
And now we see as a consequence of climate change, increased storm activity and with greater intensity.
With natural disasters, none of us can predict who will be next affected. Who will be hit next. And the problem is there is so little notice when they come.
Therefore, the challenge which the President and I have discussed back in Jakarta in June is how we can do better on this as two major countries within our wider region.
And therefore, we've had our officials study this question intensively in recent months.
This has lead to this practical proposal for an Australia-Indonesia Disaster Reduction Facility.
Specifically, we in Australia will be investing some $67 million over five years in this Institute. And the purpose of this facility is as follows:
One, to organise joint exercises which enhance inter-operability in pre-disaster periods.
Two, to develop the use of realistic scenarios concerning natural disaster management.
Three, pursuing better integration of military actors and civilian lead elements in both exercising and planning.
Four, also working through this facility to integrate its efforts with other counterdisaster management organisations which exist across the region.
We believe that this provides a great opportunity for Australia and Indonesia to develop together a world class facility which becomes very important in the future in both preparing for, training, as well as long term deployment of counter natural disaster elements in dealing with disasters when they hit.
We can either stand back and do nothing on the basis of what we have seen in recent years, or, as Governments, we can act together. And what we the Government of Indonesia and the Government of Australia have decided to do is to take the lead within our region to bring this important facility into being.
This will take some time to develop. It will take some time to properly integrate with other efforts across the Asia-Pacific region. But we believe it is the right course of action rather than simply to wait until the next major natural disaster hits.
The reason why our two governments have done this, apart from the friendship which exists between Australia and Indonesia, is this  -  we also, Australia and Indonesia, are co-chairs of the APEC taskforce on emergency preparedness.
And let us never forget the reason we are co-chairs is because we together confronted the terrible tragedy which was the tsunami in Indonesia. The impact which it had on Aceh, the impact which it had on hundreds of thousands of lives at that time, at that tragic time. That's why this became a matter of concern for our two countries, that's why it became a matter of concern for our wider region through our friends in APEC. And that's why we have resolved together to undertake this practical action in establishing this Australia-Indonesia Disaster Reduction Facility.
The work has begun, and I would thank our friends in Indonesia for the strong cooperative approach they have taken in bringing this idea to fruition. We look forward to its implementation from next year on. And if there is one thing which we have done together in the future which we can hopefully look back on in years to come as making a practical, tangible difference to the lives of many in our region and across the Indonesian archipelago we will hopefully be able to say the creation of this facility on this day with this announcement was the beginning of that good work.
I thank you very much, Mr President.
[ends]


(Translated from Spanish)
I would like to thank you, niños y niñas, for that wonderful performance.
I am deeply moved being with you all today. What a wonderful partnership this community has with the Australian Sisters Joan and Patricia.
Congratulations on the advances you are making together, especially in health and education.
(Reverts to English)
Sister Joan, Sister Patricia, friends here at this wonderful community. It is a great joy for all of us in Australia to visit this great work here in this part of Lima.
It is wonderful to see happy children. It is wonderful to see good health work being done. It is wonderful to see those who benefit from the women's centres. It is wonderful to see the work of kindness and love at work.
Years ago in Australia the Sisters of Mercy taught me how to play the piano. They are very good teachers. They have a great heart of compassion. And it's wonderful to see that heart of compassion here at work in Peru.
At a time of a global financial crisis, it is easy for people to forget the poor. None of us ever should forget the poor because we are all one human family. And wherever people are poor, those of us who are not poor have a responsibility. And that responsibility we see worked out in the lives of these wonderful Mercy Sisters here in Lima in Peru.
The practical work done here to support the health of 13,000 people is a great thing to see. Our job is to try and help that work in a practical way.
For those from Australia, if you want to understand what the modern day spirit of ANZAC is, it is this. On ANZAC Day in Santiago in Chile they raised money for this centre, our Ambassador in Santiago and our Consul-General here in Lima.
But on top of that there is a further practical need in this centre. We've seen the work done in primary health care. We see the wonderful work by the dentists who still terrifies me. And all of the other good work done here with the help of this poor community.
The one thing the good sisters have told us they need is an x-ray machine. So today I confirm we provide this centre $40,000 to have an x-ray machine.
The good Sisters of Mercy always believe in three great virtues  -  faith, hope and charity. Their charity we have seen. It takes faith, however, to build this centre with a vacant room ready for an x-ray machine when there is no x-ray machine. And the Lord works in mysterious and wonderful ways. We're happy to provide an x-ray machine to fill that x-ray room.
It gives me also some joy to unveil this today. This basic equipment has been provided through our Development Assistance Program. These are small things to help the very big work being done by the Sisters.
I finish by saying this. Why do countries like Australia support the millennium development goals? The reason we support the millennium development goals is to support small children, young people, and poor people, in communities like this. And anyone who has doubt as to why we should do so, spend just one minute looking into the eyes of one of these little children. And have all your doubts pushed to one side.
And could I say in conclusion  -  viva Peru, viva Australia, viva Joan and Patricia.


This morning I returned from APEC where my discussions with leaders from all around the region confirmed what we already knew: that the world economy is deteriorating rapidly.
The impact of the global financial crisis, which began out of the US sub-prime crisis only 12 months ago, has grown from a trickle to a flood.
It is now sweeping across the world - from China to Chile, from Germany to Japan.
It has affected the traditional economic powers of the North Atlantic and the emerging economies of the Asia Pacific. Every nation. Every government. Every economy.
Or as many leaders said in discussions over the weekend: we're all in this boat together. 
There is no point in sugar coating the situation. The global economic downturn is accelerating. It will get worse before it gets better.
Every morning we wake up to more sobering developments from abroad.
Bank bailouts  -  30 and counting.
Diving sharemarkets  -  down 50 per cent and counting.
Government rescue packages  -  from 15 countries and counting.
Major developed economies, like dominoes, are falling one by one into recession.
Japan; Germany; Italy and the eurozone have already fallen.
Other major economies have already experienced quarters of negative growth this year: including the United States; the United Kingdom; France; Italy; Canada among others.
And the projections emerging for the US for the fourth quarter are not good.
These are all fundamentally strong economies.
But all have been unable to sandbag their economies against the worst financial and economic crisis the world has seen in over three quarters of a century.
The Australian Government has been upfront about the global financial crisis from the beginning.As the world's 14th largest economy, we experience the good and bad of economic globalisation.For the past decade and more, globalisation has served Australia well.For 10 years we have ridden the wave of a commodity price boom which has filled the Treasury coffers.We sailed through this period with record terms of trade, leading to low unemployment and high growth.But the global tide has changed  -  and the good times have now turned to bad.
And our economy is now being pulled in a new direction.
It is important to continue to be absolutely upfront with the Australian people about the challenges we face and the strategy we shall prosecute to see Australia through.
The impact of the global financial crisis on our economy will be real.Its impact on our businesses will be real. Its impact on our families will be real. Its impact on our workers will be real. Its impact on our country will be real.
Mr Speaker, today my intention is to update the house on recent developments in the global financial crisis  -  especially the most recent outlook for the global real economy; to outline the possible effects on the Australian economy for the period ahead; and to reaffirm the Government's commitment to continue to take whatever action is necessary to support growth and jobs and to protect Australians from the worst effects of an economic crisis they did not create.
Mr Speaker, the global financial crisis began in the mortgage markets in the United States where easy money, lax regulation and excessive risk taking led to an extraordinary asset bubble.
The unwinding of that bubble brought heavy losses for the network of financial institutions involved in the origination, securitisation and ownership of mortgage assets.
The cancer in the system  -  in this form of extreme capitalism  -  has been the operation of credit default swaps which led to a collapse of trust between financial institutions as no-one could say with confidence who owed what to whom.
This assault on transparency  -  and the perversion of reward structures that gave rise to greater and greater risk decoupled from any direct sense of responsibility for that risk  -  caused this crisis in the US mortgage market to spread throughout the global financial system.
This in turn has created a crisis of confidence both in the financial sector and more broadly in the real economy.
The Government has been acutely aware of the profound effect that the global financial crisis was already having on economic growth now and the risks that it has created for the global economic outlook for 2009.
Already by the end of October, global share markets had fallen by 37 per cent over 2008 - this represented a massive destruction of wealth of some US$27 trillion.
Each of the world's seven largest advanced economies had recorded a negative quarter of growth in the first three quarters of the year.
And government budgets around the world were being battered  -  with every member of the G7 bar Canada having already gone into deficit. 
Australia is not isolated from events abroad  -  and our forecasts have reflected this fact.
Global funding conditions had affected borrowing costs here at home, with households and businesses facing sharply higher interest rates as banks passed on up to 60 basis points of their higher costs of funding.
Our stock markets had fallen by 38 per cent in the year to October  -  similar to other comparable stock markets around the world. 
Quarterly household consumption had fallen for the first time in 15 years in the June quarter.
In addition, MYEFO indicated that the global financial crisis has also had a profound effect on our Budget position.
The Government projected that tax receipts would be nearly $40 billion lower over the forward estimates than had been anticipated at the time of the May Budget.
The last six months of the global financial crisis has resulted in a quantum shift in Australia's economic and financial position  -  as it has in practically all other economies.
Mr Speaker, beyond the economic statistics, the global financial crisis is imposing a very real personal cost on Australian businesses and Australian families.
Put simply, the global financial crisis means tough times ahead for many people.
It means Australian families will find it harder to make ends meet.
It means more challenging conditions for older people whose incomes derive from share market investments.
It means harder conditions for the more than two million small businesses and independent contractors who form much of the backbone of the Australian economy and employment.
And it means a tougher employment environment for many people who will find it more difficult to find their first job.
A few weeks ago I received a letter from a shop owner in regional Queensland, which contained the following. “I write to you at my wits end ... The people who shop in the shopping centre I am in are struggling... my business has dropped 65 per cent in sales over the last 3 months. I have already had to lay off three of my seven staff... I'm scared I'm going to lose my business to bankruptcy. I'm scared my parents are going to lose their family home as it is security for my business loan.”
Mr Speaker, I've received many other letters like this one. I am sure many other members have as well.They show the unfolding personal dimensions to an unfolding international economic crisis. In recent weeks, the global economic crisis has taken a further turn for the worse.
The most recent data released in November indicate that the United States is unlikely to avoid a deep and protracted downturn 
US equity markets have fallen dramatically in the last month  -  now down 50 per cent from before the crisis.
Data released on the 19 November shows US housing starts fell in October to the lowest level since 1959 and building permits fell by a massive 12 per cent in the same month.
Data released on the 14th of November showed US household consumption has slowed sharply, with October nominal retail sales experiencing the sharpest monthly fall since the series began in 1992.
In the year to October, the big three car companies of Ford, General Motors and Chrysler have seen their sales fall by at least a third.
Data released on November 7 indicated the US unemployment rate has jumped to 6.5 per cent, up 1.7 percentage points from a year ago and the highest rate since March of 1994. More than half a million American workers were added to the ranks of the unemployed in October alone.
And, as of this week, US financial giant Citigroup now appears to be joining the list of US companies requiring a Federal bail out including AIG, Bear Stearns, and Merrill Lynch.
Both the IMF and the OECD are predicting a prolonged downturn for the US economy, with growth contracting sharply until at least the middle of 2009.
The deterioration in other advanced economies has also been rapid.
The OECD warned in its Economic Outlook published overnight that: “Many OECD economies are in or are on the verge of a protracted recession of a magnitude not experienced since the early 1980s.”
In our own region, the IMF expects growth in emerging and developing economies to slow to 6.1 per cent in 2009, the slowest rate of growth in more than 6 years.
The latest economic data from Asia paints a sober picture of economic activity:
Growth in China has already slowed by 2½ percentage points over the past year. The global slowdown has had a heavy impact on Chinese businesses  -  especially in coastal export zones where Chinese Minister for Social Services described the employment situation last week, frankly as “grim”.
Taiwan, Hong Kong and Singapore have all recorded negative growth in the September quarter. Singapore and Hong Kong are already in recession.
Mr Speaker, I wish I had better news to report to the House from my discussions with global and regional leaders, but the truth is these discussions they have reinforced the gravity of the challenges we all face  -  and reflects the gravity of the data released during November.
It is important to remember that the Australian economy has so far fared well relative to our peers in advanced economies.
However, the global events of the last few weeks have brought further bad news for the Australian economy as well.
In the last three weeks Australian share markets have fallen by a further 17 per cent, bringing losses since the start of the year to over 50 per cent, the same as for the United States.
These falls have been coupled with falling house prices which have now dropped for two consecutive quarters.
Consumer confidence data released on 12 November shows confidence remains at levels not seen since the early 1990s. 
Retail sales data released on 17 November shows volumes grew only marginally in the September quarter, after falling for the two previous quarters.
Car sales data released on 19 November also fell sharply over the quarter by 8 per cent.
Building approvals data released on 5 November show that approvals plummeted in the most recent data (that is, September) to the lowest level since April 2001  -  indicating that housing investment is likely to be very weak over at least the next six months.
The outlook for business investment has also deteriorated.
Credit conditions continue to be challenging with the November ACCI-Westpac survey showing that the incidence of businesses reporting difficulty in obtaining finance has grown to a 26 year high.
Weaker global growth will make it for a more difficult for our exporters to find markets.
Of all of our major trading partners that have reported growth numbers for the September quarter, only Korea has published positive growth.
Countries to which we send nearly half of our exports, we find that those countries are already in recession or are beginning to slow. The deteriorating outlook for the global economy, particularly the slowdown in China, has also seen the expected demand for commodities soften, resulting in sharp falls in spot commodity prices.
As a result of falling commodity prices, the outlook for Australia's terms of trade is weakening.
As detailed in MYEFO, we are forecasting a fall of 8½ per cent in the terms of trade in 2009-10.
A sharper fall cannot be ruled out if the global downturn intensifies, and this would further reduce national income growth.
Mr Speaker, the Australian Government has already taken swift and decisive action across a range of fronts to support growth, families and jobs  -  during these troubling times.
The Government has been proactive in addressing the effects of the crisis.
We have sought to be ahead of the curve from the start.
And to the extent that it is humanly possible, we intend to remain ahead of the curve for the future.
The Government's economic strategy this year has been framed against the background of this unfolding global financial crisis.
In May, the Government delivered a strong budget; in the budget the Government delivered: $9 billion in tax cuts to help ease the cost of living pressures facing all Australian taxpayers, and to create further incentive for individuals to participate in the workforce.
The Budget built a strong surplus which has proven to be a crucial buffer  -  giving the Government the flexibility to respond to the global financial crisis as it has unfolded.
This equates to about 1 per cent of GDP in July 2008.
In October the Government acted to strengthen the economy further and deliver much needed support to Australian households through the $10.4 billion Economic Security Strategy.
As part of the Strategy, Australia's four million pensioners, carers and seniors will receive lump sum payments. Around 2 million families who are entitled to Family Tax Benefit Part A will receive a one-off payment of $1,000 for each child in their care.
As part of the ESS $1.5 billion has been allocated to first home buyers.
At the end of November, the Government intends to make a third investment through the substantial but responsible proposal we will put to the states and territories in education, health, and in other critical services.
The Commonwealth is prepared to invest more than $11 billion more into critical government services over the next 4-5 years, starting in 2009.
Not only is this designed to prosecute the Government's long term economic reform agenda - in particular its productivity agenda.It also provides further stimulus to the economy now by creating more jobs and better paid jobs in health, education and beyond. As a general principle, a further $10 billion in public investment will add 75,000 additional jobs.
Mr Speaker, these measures are in addition to the $6.2 billion the Government will invest from 2010 onward to support the long term future of Australia's auto sector.
This sector is under great stress globally  -  as recent developments in Detroit and Washington have demonstrated.
And while much global uncertainty lies ahead, the Australian Government has decided to do its part to co-invest with this industry long term to help support the more than 200,000 Australians who are employed directly or indirectly in this sector.
Beyond all these measures - short, medium and long term - the Government remains ready to take whatever additional action is necessary to help steer Australia through this current crisis.
Mr Speaker, throughout this, the Government, ably supported by the economic regulators, will continue to keep a weather eye on the continuing stability of the financial system.
We have weathered the first part of the storm well.
But as recent events overtaking Citigroup demonstrate, we are by no means through the storm yet.
Furthermore, deterioration in the real economy in turn can produce a further round of effects on the balance sheets of banks and the non-bank financial institutions if loans arrears become more of a problem.
The Government maintains the closest possible rolling consultation with the financial sector on both continuing and any emerging problems that arise in these unprecedented times.
Once again, the Government has throughout the year acted ahead of the curve against the deepening global financial crisis. 
Throughout the year, the RBA has responded to the uncertainty in financial markets by providing additional liquidity to the market as required.
In May this year, the Government announced that it would increase its issuance of Commonwealth Government Securities to the tune of $25 billion.
In September ASIC acted in concert with regulators around the world to put temporary restrictions on short selling. In November ASIC lifted the ban on short selling of non-financials, while the ban on financials continues.
In September the Government also announced that the Australian Office of Financial Management would be authorised to purchase Australian residential mortgage-backed securities.
In October the Government secured final COAG agreement for a seamless national consumer credit regulation funded by a government commitment of an additional $71m.
And in October also, the Government also provided a guarantee for the deposit and wholesale funding liabilities of authorised deposit-taking institutions.
Mr Speaker, in addition to the measures I have just outlined, the Government continues to operate taskforces in conjunction with most branches of the financial services sector to deal with the range of practical problems that continue to arise as a result of the massive dislocation caused to that sector by the global financial crisis.
Mr Speaker, domestic policy action by the Government on the financial system and the real economy is necessary.But to be fully effective, this must be accompanied by decisive international policy action as well. At the G20 Summit on 15 November in Washington leaders made three fundamental decisions.
First, having taken extensive and, in some cases, radical action to stabilise financial systems, leaders agreed to take whatever further actions were necessary to stabilise the financial system into the short and long term future, and agreed on a concrete action plan to that effect.
Second, as global economies slow down because of the financial crisis, global governments need to step in to stimulate aggregate demand and stabilise the economy through coordinated macroeconomic action.
G-20 countries committed to further use their national budgets to stimulate domestic demand to rapid effect, given the different economic needs and budget flexibility available to each government. Around the table, leaders agreed that the best way to protect jobs is to sustain aggregate demand.
The mathematics are like this: the reality is that the global financial crisis is projected to cut global growth by three per cent of global GDP. Which means that in a US$60 trillion global economy, coordinated government macro-economic action is necessary to inject some $1.8 trillion into the global economy at a time when the private sector cannot be relied upon to act.
The alternative is larger scale global unemployment.
The third decision made at G-20 was to open global trade and investment further.
The G-20 leaders agreed that we must not put up new barriers to investment and trade. Moreover, we resolved to conclude the WTO's Doha Development Agenda this year with an ambitious and balanced outcome. Furthermore, APEC leaders directed their Ministers to meet in Geneva in December to conclude the Round.
Mr Speaker, the Government, based on the data available, has been upfront about the impacts of the global financial crisis on the economy, and on the budgets and on jobs.
But the emerging data on the global financial crisis continues to evolve in unpredictable ways. 
We face great uncertainties ahead. There are great volatilities in the data. Meaning it is impossible to predict the future with absolute precision.
If global growth continues to deteriorate in the period ahead, consistent with the economic data that is emerging during November, then there will be a further slowing of growth in the Australian economy  -  as surely as night follows day. If Australian economic growth slows further because of a further deepening of the global financial crisis, then it follows that the Australian Government revenues will reduce further.
Under those circumstances, it would be responsible to draw further from the surplus and, if necessary, to use a temporary deficit to begin investing in our future infrastructure needs including hospitals, schools, TAFEs, universities, ports, roads, urban rail and high speed broadband.
Mr Speaker, under those circumstances, such action would support growth, would families and jobs and would be undertaken in the national interest. In fact Mr Speaker, failing to do so would be irresponsible  -  and would sacrifice growth and jobs. But any such action would need to be temporary, consistent with the discipline of maintaining a surplus across the economic cycle.
These circumstances do not prevail in Australia at present. Our current circumstances do not require us to embrace such a course of action. And the Government will do everything possible to swim against the global tide to support both growth and the surplus  -  but this is becoming tougher and tougher.
The Government will continue to be candid with the Australian public about the volatile global economic environment that has been created by the global financial crisis and the uncertainties that therefore, lie ahead. Amidst these uncertainties, the Government remains prepared to take whatever action is necessary in the future to support economic growth, families and jobs.
Over the decades ahead, historians will write the history of this global financial crisis in three chapters.
Chapter one will be the impact of the global financial crisis on international equity and debt markets.
Chapter two will be the impact of the global financial crisis on the real economies of developed and developing countries around the world.
And chapter three will be the impact of the global financial crisis on employment.
The challenge for the leaders of today is to do everything humanly possible to ensure this period is recorded as a snapshot in history, not an enduring memory.
That we deliver decisive policies which stimulate demand and lead to a strong rebound in growth.
That we deliver policies which create jobs and boost long term productivity growth.
That we put the mechanisms in place to ensure a financial crisis of this scale does not occur again as a consequence of extreme capitalism, out of control.
And that through our actions to deal with this crisis, and the sharp temporary measures necessary to deal with it, that we do not sow the seeds of the next.
Mr Speaker, this is the Government's mission.
This is the nation's mission.
This is also the mission of the international community.
To be candid about the challenges, to prosecute a coherent strategy in response to those challenges, and create a rational basis for confidence in the future.
That is the course of action to which this Government is committed.


I'd just to assure you, each and every one of you, that this morning's events have been entirely planned.
We were setting a test for calmness and whether you'd respond with calmness under pressure, flexibility in response to direction and above all, a sense of good humour. And I'm pleased to say that all members of diplomatic corps have passed with at least 9 out of 10. And I'll give 10 out of 10 to my good friend the Russian ambassador who said that this is normal in Moscow.
So I thank you all for being with us in the spirit of the occasion.
This is a good day because all of us as representatives of the governments of the world know far too much, know far too much about what human conflicts mean. And about what natural disasters mean and the tolls on human lives, the communities and societies.
There are practically none of the governments or nations represented here today who have been through the last century without physically feeling the impact of some extraordinary event of nature, or some extraordinary event in civil and political and military conflict and the consequences for local communities and the people have been huge.
We in this country, proudly, since the birth of the United Nations in 1945, have been engaged in tens, dozens, up towards a hundred of peacekeeping operations around the world in one form or another, in practically in all continents of the world.
We've also been engaged in responding to natural disasters. We've also been in engaged in responding to other forms of humanitarian intervention.
So the practical challenge is this, you know, this is our national experience in this part of the world which regrettably is increasing the focus of unprecedented natural disasters  -  what can we learn from all of this and pool together into a body of knowledge, a body of practices, a body of procedures, training manuals and cooperative approaches which can benefit all of us in this wider region and beyond.
That's what this is about, and I commend therefore the idea, and it's Mike's idea, in pushing this through the system, because I believe its time has come, at this beginning of the century of the Asia-Pacific.
Natural disasters are no respecters of human boundaries. They are no respecters of political boundaries. We've seen the terrible events of the tsunami, we've seen what has happened  -  floods in Bangladesh, what has happened in Myanmar, the extraordinary earthquake in Sichuan in China and this is all within recent times and recent memory, recent months, recent years and stretched back over time and looking forward with the intensity of the climatic changes coming off the back of climate change. Regrettably, this will become more of an intense challenge for us all.
Therefore, what do we do about it? This Centre is on about, as I said, pooling the expertise. But what we then do is extend an invitation to you, the other governments of the world, to work with us in building this centre up, because we need to ensure the body of knowledge which has developed here and the practices and procedures are universalised to the greatest extent possible.
Our experience on the ground is that the most effective operations have civil and military operations working like this. When I was on the ground myself in Banda Aceh in those very early days following the tsunami, and some of the challenges which our friends in the Indonesian military and the Australian military and other militaries encountered in dealing with the multiplicity of arriving aid agencies and humanitarian organisations, and the local civilian power which had been partly decimated by the tsunami itself - it would be very useful to have a template to operate from, learning from those experiences
Too often we go through these things, those that participate in them, engage, learn and then sometimes it is lost.
The value added here is to consolidate the learning, to consolidate the practices and consolidate the procedures.
We see this as one of a range of centres which can operate cooperatively around the world. It was my great pleasure in Lima just the other day to launch with His Excellency Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono the President of Indonesia, a Jakarta Centre on counter disaster risk reduction for the wider region and for the Indonesian archipelago.
If we are to have a vision for ourselves for the future it's to have centres like this linked around the region and beyond the region globally to build up the body of expertise, to build up the body of common practices, to build up the body of procedures.
So that when the next big ones hit, and who knows where they will be, that we will be in a better position than we have been in the past to deploy quickly, rapidly, effectively and most critically, seamlessly.
To conclude my remarks, again I would thank Mike for his vision. He is largely responsible for: a) coming up with the idea and b) pushing it through the system. And I am sure none of you in your various Governments around the world have any problems with bureaucracy.
Okay, in Australia we can have troubles with bureaucracy, it is unique to our national condition. 
The fact that we have had someone of his calibre push this through and deliver on a commitment we made to the Australian people prior to the election, to centre this in Queanbeyan is due in large part to his personal efforts.
And with those remarks it gives me great pleasure to declare open on this auspicious and partly rainy day, this Australian Government Asia Pacific Centre of Excellence on Civil-Military Cooperation. 


PM: Today the governments of Australia, the Commonwealth and the States and the Territories have agreed on a $15.1 billion package to create 133,000 jobs to stimulate the economy and to drive a continued national reform agenda in health, in education, as well as in housing and in business deregulation. 
This package, this $15.1 billion addition to the Commonwealth's investment with the States into the future is aimed at boosting our investment in education and health, improving our hospitals, improving our schools, and also training more quality teachers, nurses and health professionals.
To go to the detail of it, on the health front, what we the Commonwealth and the States have agreed is for a new Australian Healthcare Agreement for the period ahead of $60.5 billion. This represents an increase of $4.8 billion on the previous Australian Healthcare Agreement.
In addition to that, there are a number of separate national policy partnerships  -  national partnership agreements  -  which have been agreed between us as well.
One, for $750 million aimed at improving the throughput of emergency departments in all of Australia's hospitals. The second is a significant new investment by the Commonwealth in health workforce reform, a $1.1 billion new national partnership in order to invest in the future training of health professionals.
Specifically, what does that mean? New places for 212 GPs across the country. New places for 73 specialists across the country. New training for 18,000 nurse supervisors across the country, as well as new training for 7,000 medical supervisors across the country. This has been a big missing area in the Commonwealth's engagement in health reform in the past, dealing with the national health workforce challenge. Doctors, nurses, and other health professionals.
What the Commonwealth has done in partnership with the States is put its best foot forward and say, ‘here is a new $1.1 billion investment from us in lifting the number of health professionals'.
In education, the Commonwealth and the States have agreed on a new $42.4 billion agreement, the National Education Agreement. This represents a $3.55 billion improvement on the past. It includes again a significant reform agenda. A core condition for this new partnership between the Commonwealth and the States in the roll out of the education revolution is in bringing about a new era of public transparency in the reporting of schools on their performance across the nation. That is a core part of the quality education reform agenda for the future.
We have also agreed national partnerships worth half a billion dollars or more, $550 million, to support teacher quality, and critically this, based on an explicit conversation today between myself and the Premiers and Chief Ministers, a commitment to enhancing school leadership. That is, principals across the country.
Many of us in recent days have had the opportunity of speaking with Chancellor Joel Klein from the United States. And the absolute emphasis he has placed there, in which we believe we must place here, on leadership within schools so that school principals become change agents for the future, particularly those schools which are in the most disadvantaged parts of Australia, is critical.
Therefore, this new national partnership, this $555 million national partnership on quality teaching and quality school leadership seeks to do that.
Better rewards for teachers, quality teachers, better training, better professional development, specialist training, specialist professional development, for our school leadership of the future. Critical in turning many of these school communities around.
Also, recognising the challenges which school leaders will face in various parts of the country, the Commonwealth has also agreed to a national partnership of $1.1 billion of new investment in lower SES schools across the nation.
This is a significant education reform agenda. It is a large increase on the quantum of investment on the past. It is a clear statement that this government intends to prosecute the education revolution based on, also, a new era of transparency in schools reporting to their communities and the nation at large on their actual performance.
Finally, across the other areas of agreement we have reached, we have achieved new agreements in national partnerships and other agreements in the area of Indigenous health and Indigenous housing and more generally closing the gap.
Also, in homelessness and in housing we have also agreed on a new national partnership agreements, similarly in disability. 
In the area of business deregulation, I make this point, in an era when business and small business are facing increasingly difficult times, what we have also agreed to do is to give effect to the deregulation agenda that we have spoken about in previous COAG meetings.
Some 27 areas of business deregulation are underway. That is, to create a seamless national economy. What we have created today is a $550 million incentive pool for the future to drive the full and final implementation of the creation of a seamless national economy. This is very good reform, and I'm pleased that the States and Territories have signed up with the Commonwealth on it.
Finally, the overall structure of the reform of Commonwealth/State relations. In the past, Commonwealth/State relations in the area of what is called specific purpose payments, we have had some 96 separate, detailed, often overlapping, specific purpose payments. What we have done with this series of COAGs this year is reduce that list of 96 down to five. Five large agreements which for the first time will be driven by a rigorous commitment to the measurement of the actual outcomes, outputs, results that we achieve through this agreement, these agreements.
This is one of the largest reforms to the structure of Commonwealth/State relations that we have had in the recent history of the federation. And it has been a good thing that we have done so.
This has been the culmination of a very productive 12 months in our engagement with the States and the Territories beginning at Government House in Melbourne in December last year, when we decided to embrace upon a reform program targeted on the future of our hospitals and health, education, housing, business deregulation as well as closing the gap. We still have much further work to go in the future, and I'll come to that in one minute.
Looking to the year ahead. There is much work to be done between the Commonwealth and the States in the area of climate change adaptation and the rest. The future of renewable energy targets, the future of energy efficiency and one of our first COAGs next year will be targeted on that.
Furthermore, the Commonwealth and the States have agreed that we'll meet in the Northern Territory before the middle of the year on a specifically dedicated Council of Australian Governments Meeting on Closing the Gap and that will be important given the additional funding which we've agreed today through the Commonwealth and the States on the Closing the Gap payments.
Also, a reform agenda priority for next year will be a comprehensive examination of the roles and responsibilities allocation between Canberra and the States.
To conclude where I began, this has a $15.1 billion additional injection into the national economy in providing stimulus for 133,000 extra jobs and a continuation of the reform agenda in health and education in our hospitals and our schools.
The next step for the Commonwealth of course will be the bring forward of our Building Australia fund list for December this year and we intend to prosecute that and we'll have more to say about our national investment in infrastructure from that time forward.
I'd thank my colleagues, the Premiers and the Chief Ministers for the cooperative attitude they've brought to today's deliberations. A solid, responsible outcome for the nation, a solid responsible outcome in health, a solid and responsible outcome for the future of education reform as well.
And this I believe is what the nation expects of us to prosecute this long term reform agenda, provide stimulus to the economy and jobs on the way through in the midst of this rolling global financial and economic crisis.
I'd like to ask the Premier of Queensland, who's now the Chairman of CAF to provide some remarks on behalf of the States and Territories.
BLIGH: Well thank you Prime Minister. 12 months ago the Council of Australian Governments met in Melbourne. At that meeting we set ourselves a bold reform agenda, nothing short of transforming the relationship between the Commonwealth and the States.
We resolved to build a more cooperative working relationship and we resolved to completely redesign the architecture of Commonwealth State relations.
Since that meeting in Melbourne, just one year ago, the world has become a dramatically changed place. We are conducting this meeting today in the midst of the most serious financial crisis the globe has faced and our nation has faced. Despite those circumstances, the agreement that we have reached here today demonstrates that we have achieved in large part the very bold agenda that we set ourselves 12 months ago.
What we see is not only a complete redesign of the agreements that underpin service delivery to Australians right across this country. We've also seen, including a reduction as the Prime Minister said from 96 agreements down to 5. Importantly, from the States' perspective, those agreements are now focussed on outcomes rather than being tied up at the front end with the Commonwealth dictating in minute detail how every dollar should be spent.
The Commonwealth has identified the outcomes they expect to see achieved and I think very sensibly left it up to States to determine in the context of their own jurisdictional circumstances the best way of achieving those outcomes.
The accountability is there, the outcomes have to be achieved, they have to be reported and how States get to them can be delivered in ways that suit the circumstances of each particular State and their service delivery systems.
In relation to health, the health systems of this country have been neglected by the Federal Government for a very long time. What we've seen over the last decade particularly is federal funding and the federal share of hospital funding go backwards.
What we see with today's agreement is an agreement that stops the backward slide in federal funding for the first time in a decade.
The states identified health as our number one priority. We accepted that in the context of very difficult financial times that we would have to understand the need to do what could be done in the confines of that financial envelope.
What's been delivered is an outcome that will see significant new services in our emergency departments, significant new surgical procedures in all of our hospitals, as well as real efforts to start tackling issues that have been off the agenda from a federal perspective for too long such as work in the area of preventative health.
In relation to education, the States believe that this delivers an outcome that will lift the educational standards of the schools of Australia. It will lift standards by putting an investment, particularly in the primary school sector, which has been a poor cousin to secondary funding from a Commonwealth perspective for too long and we welcome the decision to put parity in funding between primary and secondary schools.
We also welcome the decision from the Commonwealth to allocate another $807 million into the computers for schools program. What this means is that the computers for schools program can and will be delivered by States to the schools of each and every jurisdiction.
In relation to the housing allocation, from the States' perspective, this is a very important part of today's agreement. It not only delivers real solutions and new homes for people who either are homeless or at risk of homelessness, particularly those who are going to be under pressure in the private rental market. Importantly, what it does is put a very much needed stimulus into the construction market.
What we see in this housing package is real dollars which will be matched by the States into the construction of new social housing. This is an important part of looking after the most vulnerable people in our community, but it's also a very important part of keeping the construction market moving in what are very difficult times in the property sector.
Additionally, the allocations into both indigenous reforms and the area of disabilities, from our perspective, again looks after the people who are the most vulnerable in our community and we welcome the fact that the Commonwealth has been able to invest in these areas, despite the financial constraints that we are all operating under.
So in summary, from the States' perspective, we see this as an agreement that firstly, does start the process of transforming Commonwealth State relations. It has been done on the basis of cooperative federalism. It sets us up next year and the year after and the year after that to start really working on some of the tough issues around roles and responsibilities and we look forward to doing that.
It's a package that puts investment straight into the economy to keep the economic motor running. A package that will boost education and productivity, most importantly, it's a package that will look after those people who really rely on government services in the areas of health, disabilities and housing.
PM: Okay, I might turn it over to you for questions if that's okay.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you clearly have decided to let the good states keep control of the hospital system. As I recall, you said during the election campaign that you wanted to see some progress and improvement to this point. Can you cite some figures that show since you were elected waiting times have been better or any measure of hospitals are better that has helped convince you that you shouldn't take over?
PM: Let me answer that in two respects then I'll ask the Premier of Victoria, who is to my left, to add to my remarks.
The first is what I indicated is that we would look towards the middle of next year, that is mid-term for us, in terms of how the implementation of the cooperative arrangements between the Commonwealth and States on hospitals was proceeding.
There is a logic to that because the National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission reports in the middle of next year. And that remains our timeline.
Our challenge this year has been to get the funding lines as right as possible given the constraints of the global financial crisis.
Secondly, you ask for some specific data. One of the areas in which we have been at work at already between our election and now is in the area of elective surgery procedures. We have provided in our commitments to the States some $600 million on that from the time that we were elected into the future. A proportion of that has already been allocated to the States, and the States have indicated that they have already made productive use of that in producing additional procedures.
The Premier of Victoria will now tell you what the additional procedures registered in Victoria have been.
BRUMBY: Thanks Prime Minister. I think everyone will remember at the first COAG meeting that we had in Melbourne we talked about the future of the health system and one of the funding initiatives that was brought forward was the elective surgery funding initiative.
I think it's a great example of cooperative federalism and how governments can work together to get better outcomes, and it goes directly to the question that is being asked.
In partnership with the federal government, we put in place a $60 million elective surgery waiting list strategy. We set a target of 9,400 treatments, and I'm pleased to say that we achieved that target two months ahead of schedule.
And it's a great example of the improvements in outcomes that are occurring in our public hospital system.
And I think, I'd just reiterate a point that both the Prime Minister and Anna have made today. We have had a hospital system which has been starved of money. A hospital system which has been funded by the Commonwealth at way below what has been required. And what we have got today and we what we have had over the last year is some additional funding from the Commonwealth which has been tied to specific outcomes. And, I can certainly say from my point of view, and I think on behalf of all of the Premiers, we came to this COAG meeting wanting more money on the table, but wanting too to be tied to specific outcomes. In other words, more money in, more treatments going out. More throughput through hospital emergency departments. More patients being treated. And that is the essence of this agreement which has been reached today.
So I think all of us want to see more efficient government services. All of us want to see reform, as the Prime Minister has said. And what we have got from the agreement today is more funds for a hospital system that needs it, which will see the public of Australia benefit through more people being treated.
In addition, if I could just add, the NPs which we have announced today, I think is a fantastic outcome for Australia. You know, we have moved away from this idea where the only thing that matters in health is the hospital system. And there is a terrific national partnership here in preventative health, tackling chronic disease. We spend 75 per cent of our health budget on chronic disease. So getting on top of things like diabetes is absolutely crucial. And that's one of the NPs that we signed today.
And can I just say more generally from Victoria's perspective, we came to this COAG meeting wanting a number of outcomes, and I think this COAG meeting is a fantastic outcome. It ticks every box. In terms of cooperative federalism, it is a great example of what can be achieved. In terms of the public of Australia, more money on the table, more jobs, more economic stimulus, but better outcomes.
In terms of our schools, better outcomes. Better outcomes for parents, better outcomes for communities. In terms of the business community, seamless national business regulation. The national guidelines that read on PPPs. And the other thing which I was delighted about today was what we agreed on social housing and homelessness.
And the Prime Minister has been particularly strong about homelessness. There is $400 million on the table today from the Commonwealth to be matched by the States, plus social housing, so there is more than a billion dollars there in terms of tackling the housing issues stimulating jobs and driving investment going forward.
So I think in every sense it is a great outcome, it is a great reforming outcome, it is great cooperative federalism. It shows what can be achieved. And all Australians will get the benefit of this package in the years to come.
PM: To the example just on hospitals, by the way. You know we just talked about elective surgery. That investment produced that change which the Premier of Victoria just referred to. Building on that, one of the particular matters which the Premiers and Chief ministers raised today was parallel challenges in emergency departments.
This NP, national partnership, we put forward of $750 million, that will result in more than a million extra emergency department presentations being able to be handled in the system. That's good, it's practical, it is measureable  -  that's why we are doing it.
JOURNALIST: When will this funding start? How many years are we talking about it being stretched over? And where is the money coming from, seeing as we just had new surpluses announced two weeks ago, is that where the money is coming from?
PM: Well the answer to those three questions, there are a range of specific purpose payments here and national partnership agreements which have different timelines. The average is between four and five years.
Let me give you an example  -  the new Australian Education Agreement begins as of 1 January next year. The National Hospitals Agreement begins next year as well. So the average time span is between four and five years.
Secondly, in terms of our ability to fund these with the Commonwealth, we can do so still while maintaining a modest surplus.
JOURNALIST: You said that you spoke about better rewards for quality teachers, and also a new era of transparency in schools. And you also said that you want school principals to become change agents for the future. I'm just wondering if you can explain what you mean on those three points and provide us with a little bit of detail?
PM: Well, on the question of transparency of reporting, we had a discussion about this, and what is great about the attitude brought to bear by the Premiers and Chief Ministers is that, I think without exception, we are on the reform bus. That is, transparency of reporting of school performance to the public.
Mums and Dads having a right to know how their school is going. There has been some resistance historically on that, as people who have followed these debates closely would know. Now, what we have signed up to as a conditionality of the new $4.8 billion addition to the Australian Education Agreement, is that. That's the first thing.
In terms of the national partnership agreement on quality education, it provides a funding base, some $550 million from recollection, to do two things  -  one is to provide states with greater capacity to make differential rewards to quality teachers. And secondly, it also provides a basis for the separate and specialist training of those who are about to be appointed as principals.
The latter is very important. If you want a principal going into a difficult or a disadvantaged school to really be a change agent and turn that from being a so-so school into a fantastic school, then you better make sure that that person is equipped with the leadership skills to do it. 
And then, where that dovetails with our special resource package for lower more disadvantaged schools, and that's $1.1 billion worth of separate investment as well, covering 1,500 schools plus across the country is first class leadership in those schools. The best reward for the best teachers in those schools. Transparency of public reporting to keep everyone honest about where they were before and where they are going to in the future. And, a bucket of resources to assist investing there as well. One thing without the other is nonsense  -  you need all four together.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, your initial offer of $11 billion extra for the states and territories seems to have increased. Where is that extra money going to and is any of that going to a higher indexation of the Healthcare Agreement that you originally proposed?
PM: What we have done is the Australian Healthcare Agreement continues to escalate by us under this proposal at 7.3 per cent. I make this point to you  -  under the previous Howard Government, the Australian Healthcare Agreement, the escalation clause was 5.3 per cent  -  that is a huge difference. And frankly, when you look at the escalation costs faced by States and Territories running their hospitals and health system, that was simply not sustainable. That is why we have changed it. That is the basis of the $4.8 billion addition.
But, there is more. That is, the national partnership agreements that I've just referred to. One which relates to emergency departments. Another which relates to hospital and health workforce needs. Another which relates to the provision of sub-acute beds within hospitals. And if you put those together, in addition to preventative health and indigenous health, the overall quantum of the increase of Commonwealth funding for the States is significant and vastly in excess of the 7.3 per cent escalation clause contained explicitly within the Healthcare Agreement.
And in the case of the emergency departments' national partnerships agreement, the national partnership agreement, that of course goes directly to hospitals.
JOURNALIST: Premier Bligh, (Inaudible) you were asking for a nine per cent house indexation. Are you happy with what the federal government has offered you?
BLIGH: What has come out of this agreement (inaudible) is between the special purpose payments and the new partnership arrangements, what we will see is a financial outcome over the five years of the agreement that meets what Queensland was asking for. So, we're satisfied. For Queensland this is a $1.7 billion increase over the next five years in health spending from the Commonwealth.
That certainly, put all together, takes us much closer to where we think we need to be for the Commonwealth's share of hospital funding. It didn't come in the package marked escalation of indexation, but in real dollar terms what it means for us is that at the end of the agreement is an investment which is equal to what we were asking for.
PM: You put together these two things, which is what Anna was just saying, the Australian Healthcare Agreement there, 7.3 per cent escalation which is two percentage points higher than existed under the Howard Government. Add to that, the three, four or five national partnership agreements which is specifically targeted in the areas which I have just referred to. That's an increase in excess of 10 per cent.
JOURNALIST: Premier Brumby, can you tell us what the ratio of health funding will be after this point? You've often talked about the 50:50 target you were searching for?
BRUMBY: What you will see through this agreement is some improvements in relation to the funds share. And I guess you'll see the biggest improvement up front with $750 million for hospital emergency departments. So two things are happening here. You get the SPP happening on health, $500 million built into the base and the indexation at 7.3 per cent. That's way better as you've heard from what was in the forward estimates at 5.6 so that starts to bridge that gap and secondly if you imagine $750 million straight into emergency departments, from Victoria's perspective our share of that would be a little under $200 million, so that will lift the Commonwealth's share  -  it's not going to get it back to 50/50 and no one's suggesting that it will, but it starts heading it in the right direction and it makes those substantive improvements that the Prime Minister has referred to.
So I couldn't have come up here and wanted I don't think for a better set of health outcomes. And I say that because it's not just money on the table, it's not just the old days with money for inputs, this is linking that money to specific outcomes and that's what we want to see.
And as I said before, it means more throughput in our hospital emergency departments. It means more elective surgery treatments, it means lower waiting lists and in the national partnership there is, as I've said, whether it's indigenous health, or whether it's in workforce development, or whether it's in preventative programs, these are things which will get significant benefits for the community over time and the money again is linked to outcomes and of course in many cases to matching state funding, so I couldn't have got a better set of outcomes from Victoria's perspective. I think in terms of the reform agenda, in terms of delivery of state services, in terms of the Commonwealth paying more of its way, I think it's a great set of outcomes.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
If you look at emergency patients, it depends on the types of patients that go through so you know when people come into emergency, they're triaged, and their either very serious or there's not much wrong with them. So it depends which category, so you could put an aggregate number, but that might assume that they're all at the easiest category, so some will need a hospital bed, some will just need a treatment. Some will be seen and there's nothing wrong them. So it just depends on what type of patient category they are, but certainly you're looking at a substantial increase, a very substantial increase on what we can do at the moment.
PM: In fact depending on the nature of the intensity of the triaging treatment, our calculation is for that $750 million, looking at an additional between 1.1 or 1.8 million emergency department presentations nationally.
QUESTION: My question is to Colin Barnett. Do you think it's responsible economic management for any Australian government to rule out going into deficit regardless of the economic conditions and Prime Minister, what impact has the financial meltdown had on the money you've been able to bring to the table today?
BARNETT: Look, I think one of the realities of this COAG meeting was that both the Commonwealth and the States and Territories recognise that we are in the same situation. We're experiencing around this certain international environment, the loss of confidence in sectors of the economy and revenues falling.
For the States its probably more property taxes, for the Commonwealth direct taxation is affected.
If the Commonwealth or States slide into deficit, it's probably more to do with falling revenue than increased expenditure, and I think what's important is that everyone came here today with a sense of determination to reach agreement and to maintain services and improve the quality of those services.
Now I think all of us, I mean I won't dare to speak for the Commonwealth, but Western Australia faces a scenario where we could be into a deficit in 2 to 3 years. Now we will take some corrective action to avoid that, most certainly, but that's the reality of declining revenues.
QUESTION: So is Malcolm Turnbull wrong to say to go into deficit is irresponsible?
BARNETT: Look, I'm not going to comment on what Malcolm has had to say. I think if you have, and hopefully we won't, but if there is a sharp downturn into the Australian economy, governments will find themselves in deficit, that's an economic certainty.
PM: On the question of the impact the global financial crisis. I think  -  we had a very frank conversation over brekkers this morning at the Lodge about how this is all affecting all of our budget bottom lines, and it's just the truth. You've seen what we had to say in MYEFO and that's $40 billion reduction in government revenues.
While State and Territory colleagues, through a different taxation basic (inaudible) the same and with differing degrees of intensity.
So, it's an overhanging reality in what we're dealing with. But what is good about this, what we've agreed to today in a responsible and cooperative atmosphere is two things.
One  -  in the midst of a global economic downturn a $15.1 billion package which provides stimulus, creates the capacity to make some 133,000 jobs and continue reform in hospitals and schools. That's the good outcome that we've got in very difficult circumstances.
It'll be a tough year, 2009, for all of us, but if there's a good resolve among us it's that we intend to hunker down together and work together.
QUESTION: Prime Minister, on the state of Australians in Mumbai please.
PM: Our most recent advice from the High Commission in Delhi and the High Commission on the ground in Mumbai itself, is that the exact number of casualties remains unclear. We believe around 83 Australians were in the areas directly affected by the attacks.
Consular officers and the Australian Federal Police have confirmed the safety of 79 Australians following security operations at the Oberoi and the Taj Mahal Hotels.
We have also confirmed as you know, the death of one Australian, Gilbert Taylor, and we are still in the process of confirming the death of another individual who's family's advised us that he was killed. The practical reason there lies with our inability to access the site where this witnessed event occurred.
Of the 83 believed to be in the area, we remain concerned about 2 people, reported to be Australians. We can confirm that again, that three Australians have been injured.
If there is some small good news to emerge overnight on this, it's that those who we were having grave difficulty contacting and confirming their whereabouts yesterday, has significantly reduced in the last 24 hours. But we are, and we remain concerned about two people, in addition to the lists of those dead and injured to which I've referred already.
QUESTION: Just further to that question, are there any more efforts being made to secure the safety of Australians in Thailand?
PM: On the events in Bangkok, we convened on that and other matters a meeting of the National Security Committee last night of the Cabinet to go through Mumbai and consular procedures in place to support travelling Australians in Thailand given the difficulties at the airports.
A lot of work is underway right now in cooperation with airlines to provide support to get Australians out. It's difficult and it's hard because of the blockages at the airports themselves, but there is a massive consular effort currently underway by the Australian government to support a very large number of Australians who have been left stranded by these events.
QUESTION: You may get your 1.1 to 1.8 million extra throughput through emergency departments but how do we know that it's not simply people who, because there's no general practitioners out and there's a shortage, and people are closing their books, how do we know that they're not just people who have got colds who are going to the states and thereby this is simply just a cost shift?
PM: Well, there are two answers to that. One is, everything is related to everything else. That's why in this package, you see the Commonwealth rolling up its sleeves to assist significantly for the investment in training of extra GPs, the training of extra specialists, the training of extra nurse supervisors and medical supervisors.
That's part of our responsibility as well  -  GPs of course being in place. The second is this, and it goes to wider reform of roles and responsibilities. And that is the reform agenda I pointed to for next year which will be shaped by the reporting outcomes of the National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission mid-year.
Classically, what happens if the Commonwealth are being unhelpful is that they retreat to their bunker. And they basically pull up the walls around aged care and allow people who are being classified by the (inaudible) system as effectively frail aged remain in acute hospital beds which create problems there.
Our interim solution to that is to provide an additional 2,000 transitional beds for people in those categories.
But there is a systemic question which underpins it and that's part of the reform focus next year.
On the other end of the spectrum it is to ensure that we don't have the Commonwealth simply saying, ‘well we do GP land, and we don't care what happens in emergency departments, cos' that's your problem'. What's our response in the interim on that, it's to do what we've just done with the $750 million emergency department national partnership agreement.
So those two things are significant measures, but you are right to point out that there are underlying structural tensions in the function of responsibility between the two levels of government. And that was on our agenda to deal with next year.
RANN: If I could just add to that and I do not want to be controversial at all, that is not my way  -  but the fact of the matter is that happened today could not have happened 18 months ago. Because the issue of healthcare reform was banned from discussion at COAG meetings. So even though we are in difficult economic times, difficult on the global situation, we are actually able to through the COAG process to deal with issues like climate change, which was also for a while banned under the previous administration, let alone health reforms.
Sort of piecemeal things like diabetes, very important, and the new health call centre, but I mean, the difference is that under this process that you can actually have a dialogue and actually make some progress.
I mean, someone asked about the outcomes in the last year or so. I can tell you the outcomes in my state over the last six years, and that is in a small state like South Australia in terms of population, and extra 902 doctors, and extra 2,800 nurses. And while we were putting more and more money in, the Howard Government was taking it away.
On education, a very good deal today. And strongly supports the idea and the concept of giving principals more empowerment and authority. I mean, we think in South Australia that teachers should run class rooms, principals should run schools and that the government should run the education system, not the education union.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you've announced today a lot of funding for some very ambitious goals. I was wondering if you could tell Australians when they might see better services and more resource facilities in the schools and hospitals? When do you expect these funds to actually deliver results on the ground?
PM: Well firstly, can I say, not everything simply starts with this $15.1 billion additional package of measures announced today. For us to look at computers in schools for example, that's been flowing out through the course of the last six months. There has already been funding allocated for the provision of literally more than 100,000 computers. By the end of December I'm advised that you'll have some tens of thousands of computers already committed.
So that's one practical area. The second area, if you want a one-off example in the health space, it's what I referred to you with the Premier of Victoria, it's in elective surgery. That's work that's already done.
Thirdly, on the $15.1 billion worth of measures here, that starts rolling as of 1 January, or in some cases 1 July. And, they roll out over four to five years.
What are we concerned about here? Shouldering our part of the nation's burden, partnering with the States and Territories, in delivering better schools, better hospitals, better trained teachers, and better trained doctors and nurses. That's what we are on about. There's no magical solution here, it doesn't all happen by 4pm next Thursday night. But you know something, we are a bit closer to getting to a decent national outcome than we were a year or so ago.
What Mike Rann said, you know, it might sound party political, but it's kind of right. The easiest way for the previous federal government to balance the budget was to say, ‘okay states, get lost, and we'll give you five per cent indexation clause on your health agreement because that just means I can prop up more money myself as the Commonwealth and pretend to be a fine fellow and spend it on something else'.
Well, that's terrific, that's cute politics and will get you anywhere in terms of delivering better hospital services.
We believe we put a solid, strong step forward. If we were in a better revenue environment, we probably could have done better. But it's tough, it's a really tough environment. We're all facing that but we think this is a good mix of economic stimulus, $15.1 billion, 130,000 jobs through this package and solid reforms in hospitals and schools into the future.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister you promised to end the blame game. 12 months on can you declare it? Can you declare that you have ended the blame game?
PM: Look, you know, what's been good about this process is, and I think we've met now four times, or is it five? It's becoming an excessively familiar relationship and well what is good about the discussion is that people have a genuine passion for a national outcome and I don't see people in this gathering wanting to just play, sort of, cheap politics about this stuff, they actually want good outcomes for the country and for their communities.
JOURNALIST: At an end to this cute politics can you assure the residents of New South Wales that the hospitals with problems that have been floating the hospitals will get better and how quickly will the situation get better?
REES: Oh, look, I think that, on balance, this is a very solid package that we've been able to negotiate with the PM today. A package that is both responsible for the times, as has been pointed out, but also responsive to our needs and of key interest there, is the additional money for emergency departments. New South Wales has the biggest in Australia, some 2.4 million presentations each year, and there's no question this will go some way towards helping out those stressed emergency departments.
But equally, the PM and others have talked about the reform process. Well, this isn't simply reform for its own sake, it's strategic reform around how we better deliver a health workforce, how we better deliver an education workforce, how we better measure outcomes and how we set our systems up knowing that we have in many cases shortages of some workforce areas particularly in health.
How we fix those and set the system up for the medium and longer term and that's why I, at my first COAG resolution here today, I'm very encouraged at the strategic focus of the deliberations.
JOURNALIST: My question (inaudible) do you think you'd transport infrastructure funding through today?
BRUMBY: Well, the Prime Minister addressed that earlier and he'll get the report from Sir Rod Eddington in December, by mid-December, that'll be the interim report. So I got everything that we wanted today including a very good discussion about infrastructure and that's confirmed what the Prime Minister has indicated previously and that is that there'll be a strong infrastructure program, they'll be some announcements as the Prime Minister has said in the next few weeks in relation to infrastructure and there'll be major announcements again next year.
That's very positive from our perspective.
JOURNALIST: Do you think that the States should publicly report the outcomes of the (inaudible) so the public have a basis to judge whether they're a success or not, and then you do you expect in the discussion next year on roles and responsibilities to result in constitutional change?
PM: On the question of public accountability and public reporting, the data that will flow from the outcomes measures in each of the specific purpose payments and for that matter, in the national partnership payments from my point of view should be their for all to see in due season and this is designed to frankly improve the performance of a lot of us.
That's if you like, at a local level, (inaudible) in schools, that's what we're trying to do within communities, make sure that schools own their data for how they're performing.
To conclude, can I just say, we've had a $10.4 billion stimulus package. That's been an important step. This $15.1 billion package also helps to stimulate the economy. The Premier of Victoria said before we've got more to do yet on infrastructure.
2009  -  a very hard year but we're going to be putting every effort and taking every decision necessary to continue to support growth and jobs. It will be a tough year for Australia and for families.
Thanks for your time.
[ends]


I begin by acknowledging the first Australians on whose land we live, and whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
Why did we do the apology? You know, saying sorry is both hard and easy.
It's hard because it admits that you've done something wrong, and we did. Big time.
It's easy because it's a word, and unless you add action to your words, I think as I may have said in the apology itself, it has all the attractive appeal of a clanging gong.
And it's both those things which actually bring about real reconciliation, real transformation and real rebirth.
The apology was good  -  good for Australia, for indigenous Australia, and as I've discovered remarkably for Indigenous people around the world.
I was in Peru last week at the APEC summit, with a small community which had been supported and tended by the good Sisters of Mercy from Australia for the last decade or more.
And what struck me was among the many presentations of simple gifts from the local communities serviced by those good sisters was a very simple presentation also from the local indigenous community, saying thank-you.
Thank-you for advancing the task of global reconciliation between settled communities, settler communities and indigenous communities around the world.
And I remember when I was first introduced to the concept and the language and the content of closing the gap, on the 40th anniversary of the 1967 Referendum, and the ceremony at the Old Parliament House here in Canberra.
At that time, someone sang for us a song which you've all heard before, but which had a remarkable poetry and resonance and substance on that day and subsequently, which was this  -  From Little Things, Big Things Grow.
And that's what struck me about what we've done together, in the Australian community, on the question of the apology  -  from little things, bigger things grow.
And it is a wonderful thing to watch those things grow.
As I said before, lighting the candle of hope is one thing. Building a bridge called respect between indigenous and non-indigenous communities is another thing.
Crossing that bridge and then embarking upon the practicalities of reconciliation, that is something else and that is why we're here today.
That is the good thing that we are.
You'll be surprised to know in this job that I have, I actually read these things from time to time.
I've got a confession though  -  I only read it while the others were speaking, with no disrespect to them.
This Reconciliation Plan by NAB  -  this is a very good plan and I turn to the fifth page that says ‘making it real  -  turning principles into programs'.
It talks about dealing with financial inclusion and that is of course the provision of credit services to indigenous communities around the country and the great work that was already being done by the Traditional Credit Union, which I'm familiar with.
It speaks also about the second area of practical work for sustainable indigenous employment.
And thirdly, creating understanding and awareness.
And there are practical things to be done under each of those headlines.
This has been the subject of much work. To all the good people from National Australia Bank, all 24,000 of them who work right across Australia in more than 1000 branches, (inaudible), and who are watching this morning, I should say this to you all  -  you should be very proud of your bank.
It is a very good document and you have done a very good thing.
The other reason why it is a good thing is because other companies will learn from it.
There are already reconciliation action plans out there and many of them good. But you know, this is right up there in terms of a good document.
So for those in corporate Australia who have not done so yet, or are in the process of so doing, or would like to have another run around the track, have a look at this one. It is worth having a look at. It is a good document.
So an apology is one thing, doing something about it is another. And what this corporation has done about it is, I believe, substantial. What the rest of corporate Australia needs to do about it needs to be equally substantial. But I commend corporate Australia at large for what I have discerned and see as a genuine spirit, a genuine commitment, a genuine desire to do likewise.
And they are doing likewise. Mention was made before of the Australian Employment Covenant and the commitment that we have fashioned together as large corporations and as Governments at a meeting recently at Kirribilli on creating over time 50,000 sustainable indigenous jobs in Australia.
That's a very big commitment. Let me tell you in the time of a global financial crisis, it's a super commitment. But what struck me in terms of the attitude and the dispositions of CEOs who were there that day - Michael was there from memory and Rupert Murdoch and others from banking and from the principal employer organisations as well - is that they are fair dinkum about this. And this is a good thing.
But there is a third leg to this partnership in making the aspirations contained in the Apology something real. Indigenous communities must be partners with us. Corporate Australia must be partners with us, the Governments have to lift their game as well.
What we sought to do in the meeting in this building only two days ago as the Council of Australian Governments was lift our game. You know, I'd like a buck for every speech that has been made about this for the last 50 years, you would be a very rich man.
You would be somewhat poorer if you were to measure the bucks against what's actually happened out there in the field. But you know, it wasn't a bad outcome. There is a solid, new, concrete financial commitment from the Commonwealth and the states, the numbers of which are reflected in the communiqué which goes to the core of how we close the gap between indigenous and non indigenous Australia.
Let me remind you what closing the gap actually is, and then you can collectively all suck in breath. To close the life expectancy gap within a generation. To halve the gap in the mortality rate for indigenous children under five within a decade. To ensure all indigenous four year olds in remote communities have access to quality early childhood education programs within five years.
To have the gap in reading, writing and numeracy achievements for children within a decade. To halve the gap for indigenous kids in year 12 attainment rates, or equivalent attainment by 2020 and to halve to gap in employment outcomes within a decade.
These are big goals and some would say it is probably the right time to start muffling those goals a bit because they are all looking pretty hard. I would say the reverse. Let's hook into it and let's be real about it.
I believe Indigenous leadership is real about it. I believe corporate leadership is real about it.
What I am saying to you out of the meeting of the Council of Australian Governments on Saturday and the funding bottom line against commitments in Indigenous housing and Indigenous health and Indigenous education, and support for remote area service delivery for Indigenous communities which make up 25 per cent of the Indigenous population of our country, finally Governments at last are real about it as well.
And that is the missing part of the triangle. Indigenous Australia, Corporate Australia and Government.
Get those three together and we can start to close the gap. And I think in our own small way, that has started.
So to conclude where I began, this is a really good document. And I would say to others in the Australian corporate community, go to the NAB website and have a look at it. This is a good thing for the nation, it is a good thing for the Aboriginal community.
And with those few short remarks, which bear no relationship to the prepared text which may have been circulated to some of you, could I therefore on behalf of the Government, officially launch this, the National Australia Bank Reconciliation Action plan, aimed at closing the gap.
I thank you. 


Sixty years ago, in the aftermath of the deaths of some 70 million people in the Second World War, the nations of the world came together to endorse the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights. It was an event with no historical precedent  -  the nations of the world embracing a global expression of the basic rights and freedoms to which all human beings are entitled, and a standard which all nations could adopt for themselves and a standard by which all nations could also be held to account. 
Sixty years on from 1948, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights remains the global benchmark for the protection of human rights. It remains as relevant to every person in a world of 6¾ billion today as it was to the 2½ billion people who were alive in 1948.
It speaks to our responsibilities wherever there is a violation of human rights against any person for any reason and in any part of the world, by any government, any corporation, any organisation or any individual. It transcends nations; it transcends cultures; it transcends politics; it transcends personalities; it transcends creed and tongue.
It speaks to the murder of innocents in Darfur, the treatment of political prisoners in Burma and the ongoing conflict in the Congo that has recently displaced hundreds of thousands of people. It speaks to the plight of millions of refugees around the world who have fled their homelands in fear. It speaks to the severe poverty that contributes to the premature deaths of 18 million people around the world every year and one in three people dying from preventable diseases. And it speaks to the responsibilities of the international community in all of these areas.
Some of these threats to human rights are close to home; others are far from our shores. But for Australians our belief is in the fair go for all, and this belief does not stop at the continental shelf. It transcends our shores; it extends to the world at large. We believe in a fair go for everyone, everywhere, and that belief in a fair go means that as a nation we seek to make a difference and support human rights and fundamental freedoms around the world and at home. We, therefore, do not just stand idly by while there are denials of basic freedoms and basic rights, wherever that may occur. We recognise that the casualties of inaction are dignity, fairness and justice.
That is why today I move this motion in recognition of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and its continuing importance in the 21st century. As Australians we can be proud of our long history of involvement in the promotion of universal human rights through the United Nations.
Following the Second World War, Australia played a significant role in shaping both the Charter of the United Nations and the universal declaration itself. Alongside 16 other states, Australia was an inaugural member of the human rights commission that began work on the universal declaration, which was originally proposed to be an international bill of human rights. Australia was also one of eight countries represented on the subsidiary drafting committee. Along with 47 other nations, on 10 December 1948 at the Palais de Chaillot in Paris, we voted in a plenary session of the general assembly to adopt the declaration.
The exceptional contribution made towards these documents by the Minister for External Affairs in the Curtin and Chifley governments, Dr HV Evatt, is widely acknowledged. Evatt understood that economic security and political freedoms were critical to international security. He fought tirelessly for a strong and positive commitment to those rights and freedoms in the universal declaration. And he had the honour to be the President of the United Nations General Assembly when the universal declaration was finally adopted. That was a good day for Australia.
Indeed, the Australian delegation to the third session of the general assembly in 1948 reported in relation to the universal declaration:
Australia has from the beginning been one of the leaders in this field. We urged at the Paris Peace Conference that the peace treaties with enemy states should contain effective guarantees of human rights. We have also played our part from the beginning as a member of the United Nations Commission on Human Rights which made the first draft of the convention. Australia was one of the first countries to urge that economic and social rights should be included in the Declaration.
The Australian delegation has worked successfully to keep each article clear and concise, expressing the broad fundamental human rights in which we believe. It has resisted attempts to write in a series of limitations, which would properly be done in a legally binding convention.
That, I believe, reflects a good Australian contribution to a good Australian document on what was and remains a good day for Australian diplomacy.
The government that I lead stands proudly in the strong tradition of the defence and promotion of human rights. As a middle power, we believe in a creative use of diplomacy to build stronger human rights protections in every part of the world. One of the most important ways Australia can contribute to advancing human rights today is through the Millennium Development Goals.
The Millennium Development Goals are among the most important commitments to human rights that the international community has made since the Universal Declaration of Human Rights was adopted in 1948. Around the world, nations have pledged to substantially lift their efforts to help achieve these goals and to eliminate the extreme poverty that denies more than 1.4 billion people the most basic life opportunities.
The government's strong commitment to the MDGs is reflected in our pledge to lift Australia's overseas aid to 0.5 per cent of gross national income by 2015. Our MDGs commitment involves a contribution of just half of 1c of every dollar of our national income, yet it is large enough to make a real difference in the lives of so many millions of people in forgotten parts of the world and in forgotten parts of our own region. In this time of global economic downturn, which inevitably has its greatest impact on the world's poorest people, we reaffirm, as a government and as a nation, our commitment to the MDGs and urge other nations also to lift their efforts to these crucially important goals.
The Australian government is lifting our development assistance efforts in key areas such as health, basic education, water, sanitation, the environment and adaptation to climate change. We are giving priority to working with nations in our region towards the Millennium Development Goals through our own Pacific Partnerships for Development. Already the government has signed partnership agreements with Papua New Guinea and Samoa, and further partnership agreements are planned for the year ahead.
We have also recently outlined a stronger engagement with development efforts in Africa, which faces the greatest challenges in achieving progress on the Millennium Development Goals. Australia's commitment to help make poverty history in the 21st century represents an embodiment of the vision laid out in the universal declaration to ensure that, for all people, the rights to food, clothing, housing and medical care - the core components of wellbeing and a decent standard of living - are, in fact, delivered.
The Australian government is committed to advancing human rights at home as well as abroad. We are prepared to commit Australia to new human rights instruments where appropriate. Where we genuinely believe in the policy objective and genuinely believe we can adhere to our obligations, we will adopt and implement those instruments. We are committed to a positive engagement with the UN human rights system in implementing Australia's international human rights obligations. And we are willing to consider appropriate changes to laws, implementing our human rights obligations here within Australia. This approach is reflected in action we have already commenced on international human rights instruments relating to disability, discrimination against women and the use of torture.
In July this year, the government ratified the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. The government has also conducted consultations with states and territories on Australia's accession to the optional protocol to that convention. The government is also incorporating assistance for people with disabilities into our international development assistance program. The Development for All policy aims to improve the quality of life for people with disabilities and to promote international leadership on disability and development. The government is committed to the protection and promotion of the rights of women, both at home and abroad. The government recently moved formally to accede to the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women - and it was high time.
The government is also committed to action on the optional protocol to the convention against torture, and consultations with the states and territories and other stakeholders on this matter are underway.
Australia's renewed engagement with the UN human rights system is reflected in the government's extension of a standing invitation to human rights rapporteurs to investigate the protection of human rights domestically.
We should have nothing of which we are ashamed. We should be open to global scrutiny. We should have always been open to global scrutiny. The previous government resisted such visits because it did not want the practices that were occurring in Australian detention centres exposed to scrutiny. We take an entirely different view. We believe that a universal declaration of human rights means what it says - that a civilised, modern government must be consistent in its respect for human rights at home and abroad. That does not mean that we will always accept every criticism of Australian practices made by human rights bodies; but it does mean that we believe in openness, engagement and transparency and that we should have absolutely nothing to hide. It means considering seriously any criticism of Australia's human rights practices, and it means making changes when our policies do not live up to our national commitment to the proper protection of human rights. That is why, in our first year in office, we have ended the inhumane, unfair and wasteful Pacific solution, ended temporary protection visas and substantially reformed Australia's detention policy. We have restored fairness and humanity to our treatment of people seeking asylum in Australia, while also returning strong and effective border security.
During the past 12 months the government has demonstrated its commitment and made significant progress in promoting and protecting human rights domestically.
Throughout the history of European settlement, our record of respect for human rights has been marred by the treatment of Indigenous Australians. The parliament sought to address one of the darkest chapters of that history earlier this year, when we offered a national apology to Indigenous Australians for the policy of forced removal of children that led to the stolen generations. The apology has helped to build a bridge of respect towards a better future for Indigenous Australians.
The apology was long overdue. The government has committed to close the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians. This will be difficult to achieve; it nonetheless should be a goal for us all. To achieve this, the Australian government in partnership with the states and territories, has set six targets, including closing the gap in life expectancy, child mortality, early childhood education, literacy and numeracy, school attainment rates and employment outcomes.
We know that these are profoundly ambitious targets. Closing the gap is about making a reality of the universal declaration here in Australia today. These targets will require new approaches and substantial investment and they will not be achieved by the Commonwealth alone. They will require new partnerships with the private sector, the community sector and with states and territories. Towards these goals, the Council of Australian Governments last weekend agreed to invest $4.6 billion in initiatives across early childhood development, health, housing, economic development and remote service delivery over the next decade.
Another important aspect of human rights protection is recognition of human rights at work. With the Fair Work Bill 2008 introduced to parliament last week, Australia will close the book on Work Choices. In its place we will have a modern industrial relations system that recognises fundamental workplace rights, including the right to be represented by a union, the right to protection from unfair dismissal and the right to collective enterprise bargaining. These are basic and universal rights.
Another important step during our first year in office is the removal of discrimination against same-sex couples and their children. The government's same-sex reforms will set a new standard for fairness and consistency in Commonwealth laws. Their combined effect will be to eliminate such discrimination from around 100 laws of the Commonwealth. They aim to ensure that, in each amended law, same-sex couples and their families, for all practical purposes, have the same entitlements as opposite-sex de facto couples. The government will also soon deliver on our commitment to undertake an Australia-wide inquiry to determine how best to recognise and protect human rights and responsibilities into the future.
In 1943, only five years before the Universal Declaration of Human Rights was agreed, a German pastor and theologian wrote a universal truth when, in his book, he said that ‘what is dearest to God is precisely the need of one's neighbour'.
As a churchman, Dietrich Bonhoeffer resisted the violation of human rights under the Nazi regime because, he said, ‘Only those who cry out for the Jews have the right to sing Gregorian chants.' Dietrich Bonhoeffer was right then; he is right today and he will be right into the future. Dietrich Bonhoeffer paid for that conviction with his life in 1945, but his message and that of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights which arose out of the carnage of the Second World War are as relevant today as they were then.
Sixty years after its adoption, the declaration remains one of the most defining documents on the protection of rights and freedoms in the history of humankind.
Today this House affirms again - consistent with those who have gone before us, consistent with the efforts of those of previous Australian governments to secure the passage and the adoption of this great international instrument - Australia's strong commitment to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and our resolve as a nation, as a government and as a people to work on our own soil and to work with governments around the world towards the realisation of these rights for all peoples.


It is precisely one year ago today since the day I stood with my colleagues at Yarralumla and took our oaths of office. 
The twelve months that have passed since then have been exceptionally challenging for all of us  -  whether you are in the financial sector, in other industries or in government.
As a new government, we have been exceptionally well served by the quality of Australian public institutions such as the Treasury, the Reserve Bank and our economic and financial regulators.
This has of course also been a challenging time for representative bodies like the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry, dealing with both the developments in the economy and the transition to a new government with an ambitious policy program.
The priority of our first year in office has been to take early and decisive action to do everything possible to protect the Australian economy, families and jobs from the full impact of the global financial crisis.
The crisis that began 16 months ago in the mortgage market in the US, because of the excesses of what I have called extreme capitalism, has now spread across the global financial system and the global economy:
     * More than 30 financial institutions around the world have collapse or needed to be bailed out.
     * Stockmarket capitalisation around the world has lost 50 per cent of its value.
     * The OECD is projecting a year of negative growth for developed nations in 2009  -  for the first time since 1971.
     * Unemployment has risen in practically every country around the world.
     * 15 nations have implemented emergency economic and financial rescue packages.
     * And 6 out of the seven biggest economies in the world are already running budget deficits  -  with forecast deficits of 4.6 per cent of GDP in the United States in 2009; 5 per cent of GDP in the UK; and 3.9 per cent of GDP in Japan. The stimulus package announced by the European Commission last week is expected to add around 1.5 percentage points to deficits across Europe.
Today we had the release of the National Accounts for the September quarter showing that real GDP grew by 0.1% in the September quarter to be 1.9% higher through the year.
This is a positive outcome for Australia, especially during this global financial crisis.
To put this in context, every member of the G7 major economies has experienced a negative quarter of growth in the past year.
Four of these seven countries  -  the US, Japan, Germany and Italy - are in recession.
While most other countries are contracting, our economy continues to grow. 
At 1.9% through the year growth Australia has an annual growth rate well above all G7 major economies.
In addition, Australian business investment  -  a crucial indicator of the economy's future performance - remains strong.
New private business investment rose by 1.8% in the quarter to be 12.5% higher through the year.
We know that the Australian economy isn't out of the woods yet.
The Government has been upfront with the Australian people that this global crisis will affect growth and will affect jobs.
This will be a long drawn out crisis.
Unfortunately there are many indications that the global economy will get worse before it gets better.
Today's figures show we cannot resist the pull of international economic forces, but our economy is better placed than other nations to face this global financial crisis.
We will continue to take whatever action is necessary to support growth and limit the impacts of the global financial crisis and global recession on Australian families and jobs.
All arms of policy are directed towards buffering our nation and its people from the worst the world can throw at us.
We know that Australia will not be immune from the global recession. 
There are no easy solutions and no quick fixes, either for global economy or for Australia.
A lesson of the last 16 months is that his will be a long, drawn out crisis.
Economic growth will slow.
Budget revenues will be reduced.
And unemployment will go up.
The Government has provided early and decisive leadership in both our financial markets and our economy.
At the same time, we remain committed to our long term program of economic reform. 
The events we have seen this year have only underscored the basis of the entire economic program we took to the election 12 months ago.
As I said throughout last year, Australia cannot rely only on strong commodity prices and the hard work of the mining industry to build our future prosperity.
We need to restore strong productivity growth through a comprehensive productivity reform agenda. 
And we need to support innovation, and build the businesses of the future, businesses that can succeed in the highly competitive global marketplace.
In our first twelve months in office we have taken substantial action on the productivity reform agenda across every area of economic policy  -  in education, infrastructure, business deregulation, COAG reform, taxation, health care, climate change and water, and workplace relations.
And in 2009 we plan to make substantial progress on the productivity agenda, while continuing to deal with the incoming challenges from the global economic downturn.
While the global economy is facing acute difficulties in 2009, we should not ignore the positive developments that have occurred in recent weeks.
The need for a coordinated global response is now widely accepted.
The G20 meeting in New York, and the APEC meeting in Lima, have shaped a growing consensus around the imperative for coordinated and comprehensive action to deal with the impact of the crisis on the real economy, growth and jobs.
Governments around the world are providing stimulus to their economies.
Central banks have also been implementing a rapid easing of monetary policy. Interest rates have been cut:
     * by 425 basis points in the US;
     * by 275 basis points in the UK;
     * by 100 basis points in Europe; and
     * late last week, China cut its lending rate by a further 108 basis points after a cumulative 81 basis points of cuts in September and October.
We are therefore seeing coordinated fiscal and monetary policy action across the global economy.
In addition to the global fiscal and monetary policy response, there is also fresh hope that this crisis might focus attention again on the global trade agenda. 
APEC leaders agreed in Lima we must bring trade ministers from around the world together in Geneva in December to conclude the Doha Round.
A breakthrough on the Doha Round would be a major boost to confidence in the global economy  -  and would be particularly positive news for Australia's economic outlook.
The Government is acting decisively on both the immediatee and long-term challenges Australia faces.
Through the past twelve months, the Government has worked closely with Treasury and with our regulators to take strong, decisive action and stay ahead of the curve.
Australia has also been active in international fora such as the East Asia Summit, G20 and APEC in pursuing a coordinated global solution to these global problems  -  addressing both the immediate challenges, and tackling the longer term challenge of reforming financial markets to avoid the future recurrence of such crises.
Earlier this year, we acted on the challenges of supporting our financial markets through increasing the issuance of Commonwealth bonds.
We acted when short selling was threatening major Australian businesses.
We acted to support the residential mortgage-backed security market when it was largely frozen by the credit crisis.
We adopted a Financial Claims Scheme and secured agreement on a consistent national approach to the regulation of consumer credit, replacing a complex patchwork of inconsistent state laws. 
When it became necessary in October, we provided a guarantee for 15 million bank deposit accounts and for the term funding of our banks, building societies and credit unions.
We have also acted decisively on the threat to the Australian economy to protect jobs, protect Australian families and invest in the drivers of economic growth during the global financial crisis.
We were able to act so decisively because we'd built a strong surplus in the May Budget as a buffer for the future.
The first phase of the Government's response to the global financial crisis was the announcement of a $10.4 billion Economic Security Strategy - delivering relief to pensioners, low income families and first home buyers, as well as a significant boost to job training.
It is estimated this will help protect the equivalent of 75,000 jobs.
The second phase of the Government's response was our $6.2 billion commitment to Australia's automotive industry from 2010 onwards. 
This is an important industry that directly and indirectly supports 200,000 Australian jobs.
The third phase of the Government's response was our $300 million commitment to local infrastructure programs though the Regional and Local Community Infrastructure.
This will create thousands of jobs throughout Australia.
The fourth phase was the agreement reached at the Council of Australian Governments last weekend when we increased our funding to the states and territories by $15.1 billion to help create up to 133,000 jobs while driving forward our reform agenda.
The fifth phase of our response will be making an early start on ready-to-go nation-building infrastructure projects, after we receive an interim national infrastructure priority list from Infrastructure Australia shortly.
In addition to these measures, the 300 basis point cut in the last four RBA meetings has already delivered $600 a month in relief for someone with a $300,000 mortgage  -  welcome relief after ten straight interest rate rises in a row under the Coalition.
The Government has made it clear that we will continue to undertake whatever further steps are necessary to support growth and jobs in response to the global financial crisis.
Every responsible government in the world has moved to protect jobs through fiscal stimulus  -  even though the stimulus packages have an impact on the budget.
Like other responsible governments, the Australian Government won't sit on its hands while jobs are lost and Australians suffers from a crisis we did not create.
Right now we are still forecasting a modest surplus this year, despite a $40 billion hit on the Budget bottom line resulting from the impact of the global crisis.
But we recognise that we are in a very fluid environment.
The reason why the Government built up a large surplus in the last Budget was so that we could prepare for the difficult times that lie ahead.
Those difficult times have now arrived.
If the global financial crisis gets worse and puts the Australian economy more at risk, then the Government will take decisive action in the nation interest (including a temporary deficit) to stimulate the economy build infrastructure, and support jobs, families and Australian businesses.
It is important that we understand Australia's outlook is still better than much of the developed world.
As I've mentioned, recent months have seen sharp falls both in global stock markets and economic growth forecasts.
Global commodity markets have also seen dramatic falls, with many commodities losing more than half their value. 
The mining boom is among the strongest and most enduring commodity booms experienced in Australian economic history.
     * The Reserve Bank's index of commodity prices almost doubled between mid-2003 and September 2008.
     * These soaring commodity prices drove an extraordinary increase in Australia's terms of trade  -  from 76.9 in 2002-03 to 112.9 in 2007-08, an increase of 47 per cent.
     * This year's Budget estimated that the impact of the mining boom on our nation income this year will exceed $100 billion, and a cumulative $260 billion over the five years to the end of 2008-09.
     * While commodity prices have fallen sharply, Australia will be reaping benefits from the mining boom for some time to come.
The terms of trade is still expected to rise strongly in 2008-09, with an expected 10.75 per cent increase due to the flow-through of US dollar contract prices for iron ore and coal, which are locked in until the end of March 2009.
As a result, it will be a considerable period of time before the full impact of lower commodity prices is felt across the economy.
The substantial fall in the Australian dollar will cushion the impact of the sharp fall in commodity prices.
In addition, we are likely to see substantial new mining capacity coming on stream in the medium term.
The Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics has reported that 22 major minerals and energy projects worth $11 billion were completed in the six months to October.
A further 85 projects worth a projected $67 billion are at an advanced stage.
And while commodity prices have fallen, forecasters do not expect prices to permanently fall back to pre-2003 levels.
We do not anticipate a full unwinding of the income boost delivered to the Australian economy through the mining boom.
Nevertheless, we anticipate a gradual unwinding of the boom, which will have an impact on our national income over the medium term.
This means Australia will be in a very different economic environment to recent years.
We can no longer rely on rising commodity prices to drive continued increases in our national income  -  and this underscores the need to tackle Australia's long term productivity deficit.
From Opposition and in Government, the Government has always welcomed the mining boom and the enormous boost to economic growth and job creation that it has brought to Australia - especially to Queensland and Western Australia which have grown by around 50 per cent above the national average for the past five years.
It is competitive, productive and in several respects world-leading.
But the economic argument we made throughout the mining boom was that we cannot rely on our mining industry alone to build our future prosperity.
Our argument was that the long-run key to prosperity for all nations is productivity growth.
As US economist Paul Krugman has said, productivity isn't everything  -  but in the long run, it's almost everything.
Productivity growth has been responsible for more than 80 per cent of the improvement in Australian living standards during the past three decades.
In other words, ultimately it's productivity growth that allows us to grow the profitability of our businesses, increase shareholder value, lift personal incomes, create high-paying jobs and invest in better services for our community.
The great opportunity created by the mining boom has been for Australia to invest the proceeds of the boom in our future, and in building long-term productivity growth.
Unfortunately, when economists and historians sit down in future years to assess the previous Government's economic legacy, they are likely to conclude that the previous Government missed the opportunity to invest the proceeds of the mining boom in the nation's long-term future.
Already the OECD has made this assessment in its 2008 Economic Survey of Australia and I quote:
“Over the past few years, there has also been a sharp rise in spending, the quality of which was not always ensured... growth in government investment has been modest and spending on education or health care, which are likely to have beneficial effects on human capital, has been lacklustre.”
The budget surpluses gave Australia the opportunity to tackle the ever-widening deficits in infrastructure, education and the long-term drivers of productivity growth.
Unfortunately, those investments were not made, and as a result the Government inherited what might be described as a significant deficit in productivity growth.
Australia has seen a long-term decline in productivity growth in recent years, from an average of 3.3 per cent in the productivity cycle of the mid-90s to an average of just 1.1 per cent in the current cycle.
As I said in my Budget Address in Reply speech in May last year, quoting the words of President John F. Kennedy, the time to fix the roof is when the sun is shining.
The challenge we face now is that we've got holes in the roof, but there's also a storm overhead. 
Australia needs large infrastructure investments in transport, broadband and water infrastructure.
We need to turn around the situation where other nations were rapidly upscaling their public investment in education, while ours were falling. 
We need to put Australia back in the lead of the low carbon energy industries of the future like solar, wind and other renewable and clean coal technologies.
And we need to fix the Federation so that it serves the needs of a modern economy.
The Government is alive to the scale of these challenges, and we recognise that it will be more difficult tackling them now than it may have been in the better economic conditions of recent years.
The global financial crisis presents us with many challenges, but I want to make this clear - the global financial crisis will not result in us dropping off the productivity reform agenda.
These tough conditions only strengthen our conviction and our resolve to prosecute the productivity agenda that we outlined last year before the election.
Because Australia's long-term prosperity depends on it. 
Our long term prosperity depends on building a modern economy with advanced infrastructure, a highly skilled workforce, and a modern Federation with a seamless national economy.
And it depends on building an economy that makes a successful transition to the low carbon economy of the future.
That is why we began to invest the proceeds of the boom this year with our first Budget  -  establishing our three nation-building investment funds, the Building Australia Fund, the Education Investment Fund and the Health and Hospitals Fund.
Last weekend's COAG agreement sealed a new era in Commonwealth/State relations.
We agreed on restructuring the financial relationship between the Commonwealth and the States  -  simplifying 96 separate and overlapping payments down to five.
We secured agreement from the States and Territories to new levels of accountability in health, education, housing, business deregulation, and closing the indigenous life expectancy gap.
The States will now be accountable for delivering actual outcomes that will affect the day to day lives of Australians and their business  -  while giving the States the freedom to determine how they deliver those outcomes.
The system of accountabilities is an approach that has never before been implemented across the full range of Commonwealth/State financial relations. 
As a result of that agreement we will move towards a seamless national economy with simpler business regulation.
We will have better teaching quality in our schools, we will ease the pressure in hospital emergency wards, and we will reduce the shortage of doctors and nurses.
We are also taking further steps in the reform program for education, nation-building infrastructure, climate change and business deregulation.
We are also moving ahead on the education revolution. Last week we announced our program to recruit top university graduates from areas like commerce, law and science into teaching through a new pathway that ensures the best and brightest are attracted into the profession.
We have secured support through COAG for the National Curriculum Board, with the role of establishing agreed national curriculum in school subjects. 
We are also investing in school infrastructure, with hundreds of millions of dollars now being invested in school computers and trades training facilities in schools across the country.
On climate change, we are progressing with the implementation of the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme and will release a White Paper outlining the final scheme design soon.
The Government remains committed to commencing the CPRS in 2010 as the primary mechanism for Australia to transition to a low carbon economy.
This week the Parliament is also debating the passage of the Fair Work Bill.
The Bill delivers on our commitment to build a simpler and fairer workplace relations system that gets the balance right.
We appreciate the substantial efforts that ACCI has made through the consultation process on the details of that legislation during recent months. 
We know there will always be a wide range of views on industrial relations policy.
But we believe the Fair Work Bill has genuinely struck a balance of fairness  -  reflected in the modern safety net - and flexibility, which has been built into every part of the system.
The principle at work in this reform is to provide proper protection for the weak, and support for those who can look after themselves to negotiate maximum flexibility.
It is a system designed for the competitive global economy of the 21st century by maximising productivity growth through the full range of employment options:
     * Enterprise agreements
     * Common law agreements
     * Modern awards
Within each of these three options, there is substantial individual flexibility. 
Enterprise agreements allow employers and employees to make their own enterprise-level arrangements to maximise productivity in the workplace, as has been done since the early 1990s.
The Bill provides greater flexibility for common law agreements which have previously all been required to comply with all award provisions, no matter how highly paid the employee.
Employees earning above around $100,000 will now be free to agree their own pay and conditions without reference to awards, through common law agreements. 
All modern awards and enterprise agreements will include a Flexibility Term identifying the award or agreement provisions that can be varied through an Individual Flexibility Arrangement.
Examples include where employee asks to start work early and leave early to collect children from school, or allowing an employee working a regular shift pattern to average their wages over the cycle.
In addition to the flexibilities inherent in each stream of the workplace relations system, we are retaining tough rules on industrial action and the system of permit and the notice requirements for unions' right to enter workplaces. 
The Government strongly believes that Work Choices swung the pendulum too far in one direction.
But rather than swing the pendulum to the other extreme, the Government has worked hard to build a balanced system that reflects the realities of a 21st century economy.
Australia has very tough economic challenges ahead, but the Government is committed to acting decisively as needed, while pressing ahead with our longer term reform agenda.
We will act in the national interest  -  supporting Australian families through the current difficult times, while implementing the long-term reform that will help us build the businesses of the future and create the jobs of the future. 
And our investments in the productivity agenda will also provide a support to economic growth in the immediate future.
The Government is committed to continuing to act in the national interest in response to the global financial crisis  -  as we have done in financial markets, through our bank guarantees, and in each phase of our response to the global economic downturn.
We will do this in partnership with the business community. Together, we can get through the difficult period ahead - and we can look forward to build a stronger Australian economy.


The idea for a National Portrait Gallery was first raised by a painter  -  his name was Tom Roberts - in the early part of the last century. Though best known nowadays for his landscapes, Roberts was also a significant portrait artist.
He sensed the emergence of a distinctive Australian identity and saw the need to develop a collection of artworks to capture this.
Fortunately, these views were shared by others.
At the time, Roberts, along with Arthur Streeton, were painting at their Collins Street studio in Melbourne, set up by Hugh Paterson, a fellow painter and its administrator.
One of the regular visitors to this studio was the Prime Minister of the time, Labor Prime Minister Andrew Fisher. His office was literally next door. He liked to pass away the time and to escape the rigours of political office by spending time with artists. There, Malcolm, lies a reflection for both us for the future.
The friendship between Andrew Fisher and Hugh Paterson led to several initiatives to promote the development of Australian art, like the establishment of an Historic Memorials Committee, an Art Advisory Board to commission Australian artists to paint prominent politicians and significant national events.
These set the foundations for Australia's national art collections and bring us to where we are today: standing between our own National Gallery and the National Portrait Gallery.
So what is a National Portrait Gallery?
There are different examples around the world, and the directors of most of them are here tonight to welcome their Australian sibling into the family, this great, global family of national portrait galleries.
Common to each is the panorama of history on display and the representation of women and men through the ages whose actions and deeds have contributed to the fabric of their nations and their societies.
A portrait gallery brings to life the arid pages of history.
It reminds us of events, people, places often forgotten.
It presents us with the faces, the flesh, the blood, the human spirit of real women and real men.
Not great theories at work in international politics or the rise and fall of nations, but human beings  -  failed, flawed and great, and all at the same time.
Portraiture is important to memory, both collective and individual, and a nation without memory is a nation without soul.
There are innumerable examples of great portraits presenting great people who've achieved great things  -  or others simply portraying an idea, a moment, an event or a person unnamed.
I'm sure we all have our favourite portraits. Hans Holbein, the Younger's portrait of Sir Thomas More  -  unforgettable.
The many portraits of Queen Elizabeth I, designed to show us her strength and power, and her ability to defend England against all its foes.
Vermeer's portrait of the Girl with the Pearl Earring, capturing the beauty of an unknown girl, yet leaving us with a sense of the vibrancy of youth and richness of life in Delft during the Dutch Golden Age.
Contrast that with Rembrandt's Self Portrait As An Old Man, indelible in the memory  -  once you've seen it once you never forget it - in which we confront our own physical decline or mortality.
Or, more hauntingly, disturbingly Goya's great image of the “Third of May” depicting the execution of young Spanish citizens who defended Madrid against the French. An image of fear and death, yet defiant pride, heroism and fervent nationalism.
Each of these portraits tells a story, a very human story, a very personal story.
They tell us also of connected political and cultural events and in times and places which stir the collective memory.
Which brings me to a second question: what is a portrait?
Portraiture, as the word suggests, is about portrayal.
The capturing in a picture, a photograph, a sculpture, or video of something more than a person's physical likeness  -  more than just a face.
It reveals something of the psychology of the person. It reveals something of their spirit.
A reminder of their great deeds, or the hardships that they've endured.
It gives us a window into their everyday life, their physical surroundings or social context.
If you enjoy portraiture as much as I do, then the thing which often grabs me apart from the face which has been captured and the person who lies behind that face, it is usually the things which surround them in the picture.
The artefacts of the age, the things which were nearest and dearest to their work-a-day lives.
Great reminders of an earlier age, often a simpler age, but not always so.
It reminds us also of their humanity, their vulnerability and above all their mortality.
Those great portraits with the human skull placed beside them on the desk, again a reminder of the mortality of politicians, I fear.
The portrait tells us more than who these people are  -  it tells us what they are.
The National Portrait Gallery is a story of Australia and it's meant to be an Australian story.
The story of who we are. The story of where we have come from. The events, the ideas and the forces that have shaped this thing called an Australian identity. The people who make us Australian in all of our wonderful diversity.
Our National Portrait Gallery paints the great sweep of Australian history, starting with Indigenous Australians.
The images given to us by Indigenous Australian artists tell us of their place on this continent, on this - their continent. Of their relationship to their surroundings; of their spiritual beliefs; of their dispossession, their struggle, their past injustices as experienced from we, the secular community.
At the start of the permanent collection we see Tituni posts which commemorate the dead from the Tiwi Islands.
These objects are more than just decorated poles: they are Indigenous representations of people and of their being.
They too are portraits.
Portraiture is an art from which we readily engage.
As individual art critics, we have an opinion about how the artist presents their subject: if the likeness is accurate, amusing, pompous, fair or dignified; if the picture is one dimensional or if it tells us a wider story; and most certainly, whether the subject was even worth portraying in the first place.
The National Portrait Gallery's remarkable collection weaves together the different strands of experience from our national story.
It connects us as Australians - sometimes in the most unexpected way.
One of the most powerful images in this gallery is a small black and white woodcut by Ludwig Hirschfield Mack, who fled Nazi Germany only to end up in an internment camp for enemy aliens in Australia during World War 2. After the war he became head of the art department at Geelong Grammar School.
His self portrait, made in the camp during the War, is of a solitary figure: incarcerated, trapped, powerless, staring at the night sky. With that wonderful symbol of Australian identity, struggle and the ability to overcome the odds - the Southern Cross  -  visibly painted overhead.
His displacement, but connection to Australia, is replicated in an adjacent image by Indigenous artist Kevin Gilbert, himself in gaol when he portrayed the isolation of a group of Indigenous people looking at the night sky and that same potent symbol: the Southern Cross.
Most visitors will be amazed at the path of history contained within these walls, and also at just how up-to-date the collection is.
There is literally something for everybody in the National Portrait Gallery: explorers, political figures, artists, musicians, singers, actors, comedians, sportsmen and women, bushrangers, writers, judges, scientists, immigrants, academics, well known Australians, unknown Australians. And that is as it should be, because that is the Australian family.
Some of the works are challenging and thought provoking; others are just amusing and plain fun.
One of the more famous - ‘Perished', artist Sidney Nolan's representation of the doomed Bourke and Wills expedition - shows the explorer finally having succumbed, sinking in death back into the harsh Australian landscape. It is an arresting work.
Robert Hannaford's most moving portrait of Lowitja O'Donohue, shows us the face of dignity, wisdom, experience and great sadness. It still does, Lowitja, it's good to have you with us.
Lewis Morley's hilarious portrait of Dame Edna Everage, photographed as Christine Keeler from the scandalous 1960s, and there is a mental image best purged from your mind.
Or how about the iconic image of singer Nick Cave.
There are many ideas on display in this building: the struggle against nature and the harsh landscape; our determination and success across all fields of endeavour; creativity and resourcefulness; our fight against injustice and for fundamental fairness and human rights; the idea of Australia as a collection of unique individuals who all should have the opportunity to contribute to this unique nation.
Put together, the collection is about all of us. It's about Australia, writ large in all of its diversity and in all of our national imperfection.
The National Portrait Gallery is a welcome addition to the parliamentary triangle, providing another piece to Walter Burley Griffin's vision for significant national cultural institutions to reside within this precinct.
I believe Griffin would be happy tonight to see this great building in his great triangle.
This vision for Walter Burley Griffin's triangle is yet to be completed. There's more work to be done.
But this building within this triangle is quintessentially Australian.
It is a shining example of Australian national design and workmanship and contains building materials  -  timber and stone - from each State and Territory.
The architects have created an inviting gallery on a human scale that ties in well with the natural surroundings.
The use of light and glass creates an open feeling and allows us to glimpse the Canberra landscape as we move between rooms.
In this way, the building feels natural and easy to move through.
A gallery that you want to walk into, where you feel comfortable once inside. Not overwhelmed, not intimidated  -  a place where you'd like to spend a bit of time.
In that sense, this is a very Australian place.
When Andrew Fisher, Labor Prime Minister of a hundred years ago, and his circle of artist friends from the Heidelberg School started to talk about the development of an Australian vernacular art form, Canberra was not a reality, let alone any place to house such a collection.
Much has happened in a hundred years, as we've built the Australian nation, and built great national institutions, such as this great national gallery.
So many years later, we now have a gallery which presents the story of Australia's identity, Australia's history, Australia's creativity, Australia's culture, and all through portraiture.
I congratulate each and every one who is here this evening who has given birth to this idea, but most critically, has seen the idea through  -  each and every one.
This has been an extraordinary project and I congratulate the resilience in seeing it through to this marvellous completion.
I now have great pleasure to declare open the Australian National Portrait Gallery. May this be a grand reflection in the future of the Australian national soul.


National Security Statement
This Statement outlines the Government's national security policy. It describes the scope of national security; our national security interests, principles and priorities; and outlines the Government's vision for a reformed national security structure.
Introduction
The first priority of government is the nation's security. 
Mr Speaker, consistent with this priority, I seek leave to present to the house Australia's first National Security Statement.
This statement forms part of the Government's long term reform agenda by setting out our national security policy framework for the future.
The Government's reform agenda embraces the full scope of government responsibilities, including how we build:
     * a more secure Australia given the complex array of national security challenges we face for the future;
     * a stronger Australia given the long term challenges to our economy;
     * a fairer Australia given the levels of disadvantage that continue to exist among us; and
     * an Australia capable of meeting the sweeping new challenges of the 21st century, including climate change.
Mr Speaker, today is an historic day in the evolution of Australia's national security policy. For the first time, this country will have a coherent statement of the national security challenges facing Australia into the future, and of the comprehensive approach we propose to adopt in responding to those challenges.
Australia cannot afford a short term, reactive approach to national security.
Our's must be an integrated approach based on a clear-sighted view of our long term national security interests.
Australia must be clear in its analysis of the threats we face, actively manage and address those threats, as well as seize the opportunities we have to enhance our overall national security environment for the future.
What is meant by national security? Freedom from attack or the threat of attack; the maintenance of our territorial integrity; the maintenance of our political sovereignty; the preservation of our hard won freedoms; and the maintenance of our fundamental capacity to advance economic prosperity for all Australians.
This statement provides a strategic framework to drive policy development in the various departments of state with responsibilities for our national security.
It provides context for the Defence White Paper, which will detail the way forward for our defence over the next twenty years.
It will inform a regular Foreign Policy Statement to the Parliament.
It will shape the upcoming Counter-Terrorism White Paper.
As well as guide the development of the Government's first National Energy Security Assessment.
It incorporates the recommendations of the Homeland and Border Security Review commissioned by the Government early this year.
In short, this statement begins the process of binding the detailed and diverse work of the national security community into a coherent, coordinated whole.
The need for a regular national security statement is clear, but it has been long overlooked.
The global and regional order is now changing so rapidly that we must continue to reassess our evolving national security needs. We need periodically to adjust the lens through which we view the challenges to our security and the arrangements we establish to protect and advance our interests. This requires greater institutional agility than in the past.
Increasing complexity and inter-connectedness is a fact of life in the modern, global environment. Classical distinctions between foreign and domestic, national and international, internal and external have become blurred.
At the same time, Australia is a regional power, prosecuting global interests.
The security environment that we face today and into the future is therefore increasingly fluid and characterised by a complex and dynamic mix of continuing and emerging challenges and opportunities.
So while our national security interests remain constant, Australia needs a new concept of national security capable of embracing and responding to the more complex and interconnected operating environment that we will face for the future.
The Principles of Australian national security
Of course, not all security challenges we face are by definition national security challenges.
Some, such as community safety and low-level criminality, quite properly fall outside the scope of national security. Our state and territory governments have constitutionally-mandated responsibilities for these.
This distinction allows the Australian Government to focus on clear and enduring security interests that transcend the scope of state and territory jurisdictional responsibilities. These include:
     * Maintaining Australia's territorial and border integrity.
     * Promoting Australia's political sovereignty.
     * Preserving Australia's cohesive and resilient society and the long term strengths of our economy.
     * Protecting Australians and Australian interests both at home and abroad.
     * Promoting an international environment, particularly in the Asia Pacific region, that is stable, peaceful and prosperous, together with a global rules-based order which enhances Australia's national interests.
These interests are not only enduring, they are common to most countries that share our values and goals. These interests reflect the fact that nation states continue to protect and promote their sovereignty, but do so in an increasingly interconnected and interdependent world.
The Government will strive to advance the national security interests outlined in this statement based on a number of enduring principles:
     * Australia will seek, wherever possible, to develop self reliance across the range of relevant national security capabilities to ensure an effective contribution to our own security  -  and to the security of our friends and allies.
     * The United States alliance remains fundamental to Australia's national security interests  -  both globally and in the Asia-Pacific region.
     * As our security is linked inextricably to the security of our region, regional engagement is crucial. This includes strengthening our bilateral relationships and effective engagement in regional institutions. It also means seeking to positively influence the shape of the future regional architecture in a manner that develops a culture of security policy cooperation rather than defaults to any assumption that conflict is somehow inevitable.
     * At the global level, we are committed to multilateral institutions, and in particular the United Nations, to promote a rules-based international order that enhances our security and economy. We believe those that share the benefits of these systems must also share the responsibilities of supporting and enhancing them.
     * National security policy must be also be advanced through the agency of creative middle power diplomacy  -  an active foreign policy capable of identifying opportunities to promote our security and to otherwise prevent, reduce or delay the emergence of national security challenges.
     * Australia must also apply a risk-based approach to assessing, prioritising and resourcing our national security policy across the defence, diplomatic, intelligence and wider national security community.
     * The Commonwealth must work in partnership with state and territory governments where our national security responsibilities coincide or necessarily complement each other in an increasingly interconnected operational environment.
Our national security interests must also be pursued in an accountable way, which meets the Government's responsibility to protect Australia, its people and its interests while preserving our civil liberties and the rule of law. This balance represents a continuing challenge of all modern democracies seeking to prepare for the complex national security challenges of the future. It is a balance that must remain a conscious part of the national security policy process. We must not silently allow any incremental erosion of our fundamental freedoms.
National Security Challenges for the Future
Today we live at the dawn of the Asia-Pacific century. With it comes the potential for fundamental change in the global order, resulting in both economic opportunities and potential security concerns for Australia.
While the likelihood of conflict between the major powers is currently low, their interactions still largely shape the international order in which Australia must operate.
The Government believes that the future strategic stability of the Asia-Pacific region will in large part rely on the continuing strong presence of Australia's closest ally, the United States.
The most crucial relationship, in East Asia and globally, will be between the United States and China. For Australia, the relationships between China, the US and Japan will affect our security and our economy, given the importance to us of our relationships with each of these nations and the material impact on the wider region of any significant deterioration in the relations between them.
The rise of India will also be an important new factor in the strategic stability of the Asia Pacific region. India will need to respond to the growing threats of domestic terrorism and manage its relationship with Pakistan. Global growth, trade patterns and financial flows are also being increasingly shaped by India and other emerging powers.
South-east Asia will continue to be of great national security interest to Australia because of geographic proximity and the processes of continuing political and economic change. This diverse range of countries will, over the long term, experience continued economic growth, development and improving governance. But a number will also be faced by ongoing challenges of terrorism, insurgency and communal violence.
Australia will also continue to cooperate closely with New Zealand in the continuing security challenges faced by the island states of the South-west Pacific. This history of cooperation between Australia and New Zealand goes back to the ANZAC spirit forged in the trenches of World War One. Today our two nations continue to strengthen our cooperation, not just through combined military deployments to places such as Timor Leste, Solomon Islands and Tonga, but through a wide range of economic, diplomatic and security initiatives.
In response to this changing landscape, we need to both help shape our region through constructive engagement as well as be prepared for any unforeseen deterioration in the strategic environment.
National Security Policy Responses
Australia's national security policy builds on a number of enduring capabilities. First, an activist diplomatic strategy that is aimed at keeping our region peaceful and prosperous. Second, making sure that we have an Australian Defence Force that is ready to respond when necessary, in a range of situations from combat operations to disaster relief. Third, building and maintaining national security agencies and capabilities that work effectively together.
It is in Australia's interests to be proactive about shaping the strategic environment in the Asia-Pacific, and our own future, through regional engagement. Our diplomacy needs to be pervasive, formative and influential and it needs to be resourced for the challenges that Australia faces now and into the future.
Our alliance with the United States will remain our key strategic partnership and the central pillar of Australian national security policy. Closer engagement with the US gives us the tools to better meet the security challenges of the future  -  both regional and global.
The Government has also decided to strengthen security policy cooperation with a number of regional partners including Japan, South Korea, Indonesia, Malaysia and Singapore. I have visited all of these countries and discussed opportunities for strengthening our security cooperation.
The Government also wishes to expand our security policy dialogue with China and our security policy cooperation with India.
We have proposed the development of an Asia-Pacific Community by 2020 as a means of strengthening political, economic and security cooperation in the region in the long term. Many of the challenges we will face cannot be addressed by one country alone. Enhancing the regional architecture is an important step in working towards combined solutions. It is also about inculcating and institutionalising the habits of cooperation  -  as our friends in ASEAN have so successfully done over the years within their community.
In pursuit of our national interests, the Government is committed to an Australian diplomacy that will be more activist than in the past  -  in the tradition of creative middle power diplomacy.
Australia's national security policy calls for diplomatic resources that are more in depth and more diversified than currently exist. This must be built over time. Given the vast continent we occupy, the small population we have and our unique geo-strategic circumstances, our diplomacy must be the best in the world.
The pursuit of Australia's international interests and the welfare of Australians abroad also require this commitment given that at any one time there are about one million Australians abroad  -  many experiencing a growing number of security needs.
These increasing challenges have not been adequately reflected in the historical resourcing of the Australian foreign service relative to comparable governments around the world. Over time, this must change.
Creative middle power diplomacy must be reinforced by a robust defence policy. The Defence White Paper is mapping the strategic terrain we will face out to 2030. It will include the emergence of new challenges, such as changing levels of military spending and capability in our region, as well as new threats such as cyber warfare.
The Defence White Paper will identify the military capabilities and force structure that the Australian Defence Force requires to protect Australian interests and where necessary operate with our friends and allies.
But it must go further than that. We need greater rigour in defence planning. We need greater efficiency in Defence spending. And we need greater certainty in the allocation of resources through the Defence Budget. The White Paper will foreshadow a range of reforms that will improve the management of Defence to ensure Australia is able to maintain a world class defence force for the long term.
The contributions our men and women in uniform are making around the globe today must not go unremarked.
In Afghanistan, our objective is to reduce the spread of terrorism by helping Afghanistan build a more peaceful and stable state and so reduce the risk of that country once again becoming a safe haven and a training base for terrorist organisations with global reach. Through these efforts, Australia is also demonstrating its capacity to play an active role in enhancing international security  -  both with our allies and with the wider international community.
In Iraq, we have changed the configuration of our commitment following the professionalism demonstrated by the Australian Defence Force in achieving the mission they were set. We have expanded our program of assistance in Iraq to build a relationship anchored in economic development, personnel training and humanitarian initiatives, to help the people of Iraq recover from the war and hardship of recent years.
Australia will also need to continue to guard against espionage and foreign interference on the home front. Australian policy, military and intelligence institutions, directions and capabilities are attractive intelligence targets for foreign powers. And Australia is also seen as a potential alternative source of sensitive defence, intelligence and diplomatic information shared by our allies. Electronic espionage in particular will be a growing vulnerability as the Australian Government and society become more dependent on integrated information technologies. Both commercial and state-based espionage, while not visible to the public eye, are inevitable. This challenge must and will be met with full vigour.
The Government's approach to national security encompasses more than just traditional statecraft and classical military capabilities. 
Counter-terrorism and protective security challenges were catapulted into prominence with the attacks of September 11, 2001 in the United States. Of course, Australia had previously been exposed to terrorism through serious terrorist attacks in Australia. This led in the 1980s to the establishment of domestic terrorism protection and response capabilities, which have been refined over time to provide world class response arrangements to protect our community.
But the threat to us from those responsible for the September 11 attacks and their sympathisers is different from that of the past. Australia has been explicitly and publicly mentioned as an ‘enemy' by Islamist extremists and Australians have been specifically targeted in Bali, Baghdad and Jakarta. Even in the terrorist attacks in Mumbai last week, two Australians lost their lives and a number of others were injured. In our own community, individuals have also been convicted by Australian courts on charges relating to preparing for attacks in this country.
Terrorism is likely to endure as a serious ongoing threat for the foreseeable future. Extremism leading to violence or terrorism continues to pose a direct threat to Australia and Australian security interests.
Next year, the Government will release a Counter-Terrorism White Paper responding to the continuing threat to Australia from terrorism and, where appropriate, make adjustments to our counter-terrorism policy arrangements. This will include our bilateral arrangements and capacity building activities with regional countries.
The Australian Government is committed to combating terrorism to protect Australians and Australian security interests, and to promote international security. Effective mitigation of terrorist attacks involves the combination of an appropriate security response with broader strategies to enhance social cohesion and resilience and lessen the appeal of radical ideology.
Australia's security and law enforcement agencies are playing a critical role in protecting Australian citizens, both at home and abroad. The Government is committed to ensuring that our agencies are resourced appropriately to meet the challenges of terrorist threats. And we will continue to work with the states and territories and with international partners to ensure that our responses are comprehensive and effective.
Beyond the threat of terrorism, concepts of national security have continued to evolve since the end of the Cold War.
The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, including the possibility of such weapons falling into the hands of terrorists, is a threat of increasing international concern. Efforts to strengthen the global non-proliferation regime must focus on both state and non-state actors.
The Australian Government is strongly committed to increasing Australia's role in international efforts to strengthen nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament, and will work with our friends and neighbours to advance practical, effective steps to achieve this goal. That is why we have established the International Commission on Nuclear Non-proliferation and Disarmament.
Intrastate conflict in our region and beyond will continue to flare. It will be caused by weak state institutions struggling to cope with a complex mix of political, socio-economic, cultural, criminal and religious factors. And it will bring disastrous consequences to local communities when it occurs.
Australia has made major long term commitments to help resolve conflict in Solomon Islands and Timor Leste. But the risk of fragile states disrupting stability and prosperity in our region is an ongoing challenge. The Government is committed to a policy of cooperation with the island nations of the Pacific through Pacific Partnerships for Development and in particular helping them to reach the Millennium Development Goals. This is designed to build the basic capacity for long term economic capacity building  -  essential to long term political stability.
The humanitarian implications for the people affected in these conflicts are also of concern to Australia's national security and foreign policy interests. We expect to make practical contributions in times of crisis, commensurate with our role in the international community. Failure to do so at source also runs the risk of refugee outflows to neighbouring states, including Australia.
The list of non-traditional threats or new security challenges is also growing.
Transnational crime  -  such as trafficking in persons, drugs and arms; people smuggling and the illegal exploitation of resources  -  will remain a continuing challenge.
These activities can undermine political and social institutions, inflict economic and personal harm or contribute to other forms of violence. And it is here that the role of non state actors is critical.
The Government is committed to deploying all necessary resources to prosecute those criminals who seek to undermine Australia's border security. We will work with our partners in the region to shut down the illegal operations of people smugglers and see them put in jail where they belong. The Government has recently agreed to a series of new measures at a cost of $44.1 million to further combat people smuggling in cooperation with regional partners.
Organised crime more broadly is a growing concern for Australia, one the Government is determined to combat. The Australian Crime Commission has estimated that organised crime costs Australia over $10 billion every year.
The Government will develop two initiatives in the related areas of border management and serious and organised crime. We will strengthen border management by simplifying arrangements and improving coordination across all agencies.
Second, we will clearly define the role of the Commonwealth in combating serious and organised crime and enhance coordination among Commonwealth agencies.
Let me return for a moment to the serious matter of people-smuggling, that is, the organised, unauthorised arrival of people by boat to Australia.
The arrangements the Government has inherited involve a wide range of government agencies but lack unified control and direction, and a single point of accountability.
The Government has decided therefore to move quickly to better enable the existing Australian Customs Service to meet this resurgent threat to our border integrity. To this end we will in coming weeks establish new arrangements whereby the Australian Customs Service is augmented, re-tasked and re-named the Australian Customs and Border Protection Service. This arrangement will create in the Australian Customs and Border Protection Service a capability to task and analyse intelligence, coordinate surveillance and on-water response, and engage internationally with source and transit countries to comprehensively address and deter people smuggling throughout the operating pipeline from source countries to our shores. The co-location of agencies and capabilities in this way is a concept strongly supported by the Homeland and Border Security Review.
In terms of other new security challenges, it is increasingly evident that the sophistication of our modern community is a source of vulnerability in itself. For example, we are highly dependent on computer and information technology to drive critical industries such as aviation; electricity and water supply; banking and finance; and telecommunications networks.
This dependency on information technology makes us potentially vulnerable to cyber attacks that may disrupt the information that increasingly lubricates our economy and system of government. A number of actors may carry out such attacks ranging from hackers, to commercial entities and foreign states. The same technology also provides tools for terrorists, who use computers to share information, recruit, communicate and spread their message of hate and violence. They exploit the freedom provided by the internet and the power of tools such as encryption to operate beyond the law.
The Government will enhance Australia's e-security and is considering the recently completed e-security review.
The irony of technology today is that, while on the one hand we are seeking to invest in sophisticated information, intelligence and military technology, on the other, we have to protect ourselves from the extreme use of basic, readily available technology and hardware by terrorist groups.
As a consequence of rapid advances in technological capability, Australia must remain technologically and scientifically alert, agile and robust so as to anticipate and respond to new and emerging threats arising from the ongoing technology revolution. To achieve this, the Government is now developing a National Security Science and Innovation Strategy which embraces the full breadth of national security threats arising from the rapid changes to the technological capabilities of those hostile to Australia's national security interests.
The impact of globalisation and advances in technology mean that the partnerships between industry, governments and the community that have evolved since 2001 are vital and will remain an important part of any future national security policy.
Of course, crises may not be caused by human action alone. Even today, we recognise the potential for disease, especially a pandemic, to have dramatic consequences for the economies and societies of our neighbours, and for Australia. A pandemic is bound to create real physical and social hardship and policy challenges for Australia, whether it has a direct impact upon us or not.
In addition to these changes, a range of new and emerging challenges such as climate change and energy security, unless properly dealt with by effective policy action, will have long term security impacts  -  locally, regionally or globally.
Over the long term, climate change represents a most fundamental national security challenge for the long term future.
Less attention has been given to the security implications that climate change could bring to Australia compared with other traditional security threats. Significant climate change will bring about unregulated population movements, declining food production, reductions in arable land, violent weather patterns and resulting catastrophic events. This is an area of emerging consequences which will require the formal incorporation of climate change within Australia's national security policy and analysis process.
Demographic changes will also affect the region with total population exceeding four billion by 2020, or 56 per cent of the world's total. The demographic changes in our region will mean that by 2020 when we look to our north, we will see a very different region to the one we see now  -  one where population, food, water and energy resource pressures will be greater than ever before.
The Government is committed to ensuring Australia's long term energy security. We are developing a strategy to make sure Australia has access to adequate, reliable and affordable energy now and into the future. An important step in this process is the National Energy Security Assessment or NESA. The NESA provides a comprehensive assessment of critical energy policy challenges per sector and identifies how these challenges could affect long term energy security. This assessment will be an important input into the Energy White Paper, which will put in place policy settings to ensure Australians enjoy reliable energy security into the future.
Given the breadth, depth and complexity of Australia's emerging national security challenges and the range of inter-connected policy responses to which they give rise, Australia will need to develop a new level of coordination in national security policy matters both within the Commonwealth and across all levels of government.
Australia's National Security Structure
One of the fundamental assets we have to promote our national security objectives is our underlying strength, resilience and cohesion as a nation.
We are the world's largest island nation.
We are rich in physical resources.
Australia's ‘soft power' assets are also significant.
We are a modern, democratic and tolerant country.
Our population is relatively small, highly urbanised and educated.
Our economy is competitive, outwardly-focused and resilient.
And internationally, we have a proud record of contribution to global security and economic stability.
We are widely respected for our ideas and our actions. We can, and do, make a positive difference in the world.
Australia also has a wide range of dedicated tools to actively achieve our national security interests. These include our technologically advanced and well-trained defence force Australian Defence Forces and Australian Federal Police, our highly effective diplomatic service and our well coordinated international development assistance efforts.
Our border security and transport security agencies have generally performed well although there remains a capacity for further improvement.
We have well-established and well-integrated intelligence agencies that collect intelligence and assess the implications for our security environment  -  although once again, there remains scope for continued improvement.
Furthermore, legislative, regulatory and administrative oversight measures provide an integral framework from which our overall efforts are empowered.
It is also important to recognise that our national security assets extend beyond the Commonwealth Government to include the states and territories, who are first responders to security incidents within their jurisdictions.
We have highly capable police services which respond to a spectrum of challenges from threats to public safety to terrorism; and emergency response organisations that protect the community in our most vulnerable times.
The Commonwealth will also provide physical and financial assistance to states and territories during an emergency when requested to do so; and coordinate assistance to Australians affected by emergencies overseas.
I would like to emphasise two other assets, outside of government, which make an important contribution to our national security - they are business and the general community.
In some areas, up to 90 per cent of our critical infrastructure is owned and operated by the private sector. Our economy and our future as a trading nation depend on our ability to protect national assets such as our airports, ports, bridges, and water and power facilities from catastrophic failure. We will work with the private sector, and state and territory governments, to protect this infrastructure and the people visiting our national icons and monuments and other places where large numbers of people gather.
The business community has a great deal of knowledge and expertise and plays a vital role in our combined efforts. The wider community also plays an important role in national security. The Government knows that it is essential to engage with the Australian people on the threats we face and the role the wider community can play in responding to those threats.
Through community engagement we can achieve important national security outcomes ranging from sustaining support for our forces deployed overseas, undermining the influence of violent ideologies and preserving the social cohesion of our diverse society. Just as neighbourhood watch programs promote security at a local level, so we recognise the contribution all Australians can make to promoting security at a national level.
In Australia we have a strong tradition of volunteering to support our communities, especially in times of emergency, demonstrating the innate resilience and collective responsibility we all share as Australians. This trait is a great strength within our community, a strength the Government will continue to encourage and nurture for the future.
But it is one thing to have great institutions of state, effective partnerships between governments and with business and the community. We also need to be smart about how we use these to protect and promote national security.
I believe that Australia's national security community is highly effective and has proven highly adaptable. But in an increasingly complex and interconnected security environment, we need a more integrated national security structure that enhances national security policy coordination.
The House will recall I commissioned Mr Ric Smith, former Secretary of the Department of Defence and Ambassador to China and Indonesia, to report on the best and most efficient way to coordinate our overall national security arrangements.
Mr Smith has now finished his work. We have considered his report and strongly agreed its recommendations. The Office of National Security within my department is preparing to implement these recommendations.
The Government in opposition made a number of commitments on national security upon coming to office. Perhaps the most hotly debated was the proposal to create a Department of Homeland Security.
The Smith Review considered the option of achieving greater cooperation by creating a Department of Homeland Security, and did not recommend that model for Australia. The Government has accepted this strong advice. Mr Smith's advice is that big departments risk becoming less accountable, less agile, less adaptable and more inward-looking. What we need is the opposite.
At the same time, Mr Smith has concluded that existing national security departments, agencies and capabilities do need better coordination.
The Government has therefore concluded that the best solution for Australia is not another agency, but a new level of leadership, direction and coordination among the agencies we already have. We will therefore build on the existing community of relatively small, separate agencies, ensuring they remain nimble, accountable and above all, properly joined-up.
This will create integrated arrangements that enhance national security policy coordination and action. The arrangements will focus on optimising and refining mechanisms for strategic planning and coordination. In short, the ‘function' of central policy coordination is being adopted but implemented by a different means.
The first new step in creating our national security structure will be to appoint a National Security Adviser (NSA). The NSA will be the source of advice to the Prime Minister on all policy matters relating to the security of the nation, and to oversee the implementation of all national security policy arrangements.
Today I am pleased to announce Mr Duncan Lewis as the first National Security Adviser. Mr Lewis has served governments of both political persuasions with distinction. Also, as a former SAS commander, Mr Lewis has a distinct combination of military and civilian experience.
Why do we need a National Security Adviser? Put simply, to provide improved strategic direction within the national security community; to support whole-of-government national security policy development and crisis response; and to promote a cohesive national security culture.
The National Security Adviser will be appointed at the Associate Secretary level within the Prime Minister's Department and interact directly with agency and department heads. The National Security Adviser's responsibilities will complement the roles and responsibilities of the current heads of agencies by enhancing whole-of-government coordination. This new position will be assisted by a Deputy National Security Adviser and a Group within the Prime Minister's Department that includes the Office of National Security - an election commitment we delivered on in December last year. The Office of National Assessments will remain a separate entity within the Prime Minister's portfolio.
One of the first tasks I have asked the National Security Adviser to undertake as part of his responsibilities is to establish an executive development program in national security. This program will initially be aimed at senior officials, with a view to broadening over time to include counterparts in the private sector, academia and the non-government sector. This new initiative will enhance the capacity of senior officials across the broad national security community to achieve whole-of-government outcomes and to lead cultural change within their own areas. One of the options under consideration for delivery of this program is a National Security College.
The second new element of our national security architecture is a strategic policy framework. This framework will guide and coordinate effort across the national security community by setting priorities, allocating resources and evaluating performance. As a corner-stone of this framework, I intend to present periodically a National Security Statement to Parliament. This statement will set priorities and shape detailed policy development. The National Security Adviser will work towards a coordinated budget process for national security, to advise on the best allocation of resources across portfolios to most effectively achieve our priorities and to assist in the preparation of Australia's first national security budget.
The final element of the strategic policy framework is an evaluation mechanism, coordinated by the National Security Adviser. It will consider performance against whole-of-government outcomes in light of the priorities set out in the National Security Statement and help inform future resource allocation.
We will, of necessity, make choices concerning the relative priority to be afforded to future national security capabilities and policies, and the effective and efficient use of existing resources. The new strategic policy framework will ensure that we do so in an informed, accountable and whole-of-government manner.
In terms of our governance arrangements for national security, at the Ministerial level, the National Security Committee of Cabinet, which I chair, remains the peak Commonwealth ministerial decision-making body on national security matters - and the main vehicle for coordinating the Government's efforts in this regard.
The Secretaries Committee on National Security, known as SCNS, remains the peak inter-departmental committee which considers national security policy and operational matters of an ongoing nature in addition to all matters to be put before the National Security Committee of Cabinet. Reflecting the Government's new approach to national security, the Secretaries Committee will broaden its agenda, and expand its membership, to strengthen its coordinating role on homeland and border security matters - similar to the pivotal role it plays in regard to international security policy. The National Security Adviser will act as Deputy Chair of SCNS under the Secretary of the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet.
The third, and new, element of our governance arrangements is the establishment of a National Intelligence Coordination Committee, or NICC. This committee, which the National Security Adviser will chair, will ensure the national intelligence effort is fully and effectively integrated. This will make sure that our intelligence efforts - including foreign, defence, security and transnational law enforcement intelligence - are closely aligned and accord with Australia's national security priorities.
The Office of National Assessments will continue to exercise its statutory responsibilities, while working closely with the National Security Adviser and the Office of National Security. The Director General of ONA will continue to provide independent assessments on international political, strategic and economic developments to the Prime Minister and senior national security ministers.
The fourth, and again new, element of the governance arrangements involves improving our national crisis management capabilities. The Government will consider the recommendation made by Mr Smith to establish a Crisis Coordination Centre to support government decision making during crises.
The Crisis Coordination Centre would subsume the existing Attorney-General's Department coordination centre. The centre will improve inter-agency whole-of-government management of major crises and be supported by new facilities for secure ministerial participation in rolling national security crisis management.
I have asked the Attorney-General to develop the detail of this proposal in consultation with the National Security Adviser and relevant ministers for consideration through the Budget process.
Conclusion
The fundamental purpose of the Government's periodic national security statements is to set out whole-of government national security priorities.
In this, the Government's inaugural National Security Statement, as noted through my preceding comments, our new priorities include:
     * improving the coordination of national security policy with reform of the structure of national security decision making through establishing for the first time a National Security Adviser;
     * implementing the recommendations of the Smith Report on Homeland and Border Security.
         * this includes the initiatives I have announced on organised crime, border security and science and innovation;
     * enhancing ADF capabilities;
     * strengthening the US alliance;
     * strengthening our cooperation with regional partners;
     * promoting an Asia-Pacific Community;
     * actively pursuing nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament through the International Commission on Nuclear Non-proliferation and Disarmament;
     * enhancing economic development in the South-west Pacific to underpin long term security;
     * enhancing Australia's e-security capability; and
     * incorporating the implications of climate change and energy security into the formal national security decision making framework.
This inaugural national security statement outlines the new approach the Government is taking to address current and future national security challenges.
It is intended that this become a regular statement to the parliament of the state of Australia's national security and the new and emerging challenges that we face.
Just as the annual Budget Statement provides an annual review of the state of the economy.
Our world and our region are in a significant period of transition.
Australia will therefore need to be adept at adjusting our policies and capabilities as appropriate in order to maintain our enduring objective of a secure Australia and a strong Australia in the face of unprecedented changes and challenges that lie ahead of us in this the century of the Asia-Pacific.
Summary and Conclusions -  Report of the Review of Homeland and Border Security
This document outlines the summary and conclusions of the Report of the Review of the Homeland and Border Security which was undertaken by Mr Ric Smith AO PSM and presented to the Australian Government on 27 June 2008.
Summary and Conclusions
At any time Australia faces threats from a range of sources which in different ways can put our institutions of state, our people, our economic assets and our technology at risk. These hazards include espionage, foreign interference, terrorism, politically motivated violence, border violations, drug trafficking, cyber attack, organised crime, natural disasters, industrial accidents and biosecurity events. In 2008 - 09 the Australian Government will spend an estimated $4 - 4.5 billion in countering, mitigating and responding to these hazards.
Some of the threats Australia faces are as old as our society. Globalisation has however magnified many of them and enabled new ways of delivering them. It has also generated new threats. At the same time, expectations of government have grown, and the pace and velocity of government business have increased.
One response to these changes would be to create new organisations or merge existing ones - some countries have done this. This approach raises several risks. It could disrupt unduly the successful and effective work of the agencies concerned and create significant new costs. Large organisations tend to be inward-looking, siloed and slow to adapt, and thus ill-suited to the dynamic security environment. For a number of the agencies concerned national security considerations are embedded with a broad range of other service delivery, policy, program and regulatory functions which could be jeopardised by restructuring them around their security roles.
The other response would be to recognise and build on the strengths of existing institutions but to identify weaknesses and address them. This is the approach this Review considers is more appropriate for Australia. It has several benefits. It would recognise that our existing arrangements are generally effective and that for the most part our departments and agencies are working well with each other. Above all, the smaller, separate agencies which comprise this model are likely to be more agile and accountable than large agencies.
In building on the existing Australian model, two things are required. First, the departments and agencies concerned, both those dedicated to security functions and those which contribute to national security as well as performing other functions, should be regarded as a community. This is important both to enable the Government to make strategic judgements across a wide range of hazards, including on the allocation of resources, and to ensure that the agencies benefit from access to each others skills, experience and other capabilities. Second, the departments and agencies concerned must be well connected and networked, and cultural, technical and other barriers minimised.
Strategic framework, leadership and connectedness
While Australian Government agencies are committed to whole-of-government performance and generally understand their roles in the broad national security community, there is a need for an overarching policy framework and for strategic direction. Such a framework would better equip the Government to plan and evaluate the activities of agencies and to ensure targeted resource allocation that reflects current priorities.
These needs could be addressed through periodic statements by the Prime Minister about the Government's approach to national security, and the articulation of its strategic priorities. Strategic direction would be reinforced by reporting on whole of government outcomes and decision-making enhanced by a coordinated national security budget submission which would provide more rigorous cross-portfolio data than is presently available.
The appointment of a National Security Adviser, with a deputy, in the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet would provide a new level of leadership and help ensure that agencies are properly joined up. The NSA's focus would go beyond coordination and committees - which could in fact be streamlined - to promoting a cohesive national security community culture, including through training, secondments and joint units. The NSA would also facilitate the Commonwealth's work with the states and territories which contribute many of the powers and capabilities needed to support the national security effort. The Attorney General's portfolio would continue to be a locus for a wide range of national security issues within the Commonwealth.
This better integrated and more strategic approach would be supported by broadening the mandate and membership of the Secretaries Committee on National Security to embrace the full range of national security issues. Within SCNS itself and in the National Security Committee of Cabinet there should be scope for more forward looking strategic policy discussions. Key areas for this high level whole-of-government deliberation could include strategic policy frameworks for border management, the role of the Commonwealth in combating serious and organised crime, national intelligence priorities across the foreign, defence, security and law enforcement domains, and a national security science and innovation strategy.
While crisis management by the Commonwealth has generally been done well ‘on the day', the current hazard-specific approach and the absence of consistent national arrangements for handling significant crises exposes the Government to several areas of vulnerability. The role of the existing National Crisis Committee should be expanded to provide the Australian Government with an all hazards central coordination body equivalent to those in other jurisdictions, and appropriate crisis management facilities created both for ministers (an Australian Ministerial Briefing Room) and for operational coordination by officials (a Crisis Coordination Centre).
The increasingly enmeshed nature of foreign, defence, security and law enforcement intelligence points to the need for a single, overarching framework for national intelligence coordination and priority setting. There is also a need for a closer relationship between the Australian Intelligence Community agencies and the intelligence analysis units established within non-AIC agencies in response to newly emerging threats. In an environment in which the sharing of intelligence and data is critical, intelligence and law enforcement agencies must ensure that their relationships are seamless.
While there have already been significant improvements in access to national security information, some legislative, technical and cultural barriers to information sharing - within and between governments and the private sector - remain. These should be addressed by the NSA, supported by a National Security Chief Information Officer. Leadership will be critical in creating the appropriate culture and fostering the mindsets required to achieve greater integration across the national security community.
The agenda beyond terrorism
Particularly since 11 September 2001, the national security agenda has emphasised counter terrorism arrangements and focused on prevention, preparedness and immediate response. This reflected the growth in the terrorist threat to Australian interests and the potentially extreme consequences of an incident. That focus has led to substantial investment and development of capabilities, and high levels of inter agency and cross-jurisdictional cooperation. Having regard to what has been achieved in this area, the Review considers that it is timely to provide an additional focus on other threats and hazards.
Emergency management across all hazards has received limited senior attention within the Commonwealth. But non-terrorist disasters, such as industrial accidents and natural disasters, are frequent and have significant impacts - natural disasters are estimated to cost Australia on average over $1 billion a year. While emergency management is primarily a matter for the states and territories, the Commonwealth does have important roles in contributing money (particularly recovery assistance), providing some capabilities and facilitating national coordination, capability enhancement and interoperability. It also provides assistance in response to natural disasters overseas, and plays a part in capability development in countries in our region.
A more integrated national approach to emergency management would optimise efforts and address fundamental gaps such as the lack of effective arrangements to deliver community warnings and of a national emergency plan to deal with catastrophic disasters. To help address the current distinction between responses to terrorism and other disasters, the National Security Adviser, or the deputy, should chair the Australian Emergency Management Committee, and the work of it and the National Counter-Terrorism Committee should be better integrated.
Serious and organised crime, as an ever present threat to the safety and prosperity of Australians and a challenge to the integrity of our institutions, is as important as any other security threat, with an estimated cost in excess of $10 billion per year. Crime is increasingly sophisticated and transnational. The states and territories have major roles and the Commonwealth needs to engage effectively with them in this area. The current arrangements for coordinating Commonwealth efforts and priorities are limited. There are some gaps in national efforts, such as limited sharing of police capabilities and case management databases, and more attention could be given to criminal intelligence collection and analysis. A strategic framework for Commonwealth efforts in relation to serious and organised crime should be developed for consideration by government.
Electronic attack is a significant new means of compromising national security and enabling criminal activity. Governments, businesses and individuals are increasingly vulnerable to such attacks. The Commonwealth has a special role to play in this area given its high level capabilities in e-security and the cross-jurisdictional nature of the threat. It is however difficult to quantify the magnitude of the problem and the potential economic and social consequences, particularly of a large-scale cyber attack. An independent risk analysis of the e-security environment should be commissioned to better inform the strategic direction of our efforts. Current arrangements within the Australian Government for ensuring effective e-security generally work well, although it is an area in need of consistent senior policy attention. In some areas roles and responsibilities should be clarified to avoid confusion and possible duplication of effort. These issues should be addressed as part of the current e-security review being led by the Attorney-General's Department, which has the lead role in this area.
To date the Commonwealth's role in research and capability development activities has been focused predominantly on counter-terrorism. More could be done to reach beyond counter terrorism and support research in other areas of national security. There should also be more formalised coordination between peak national committees in the areas of counter terrorism, health and emergency management to ensure Australia has the capabilities it needs in the current threat environment.
Better protecting Australia's borders
Controlling the border is critical to effective national security. Australia has to date retained control of its border, but this is a complex task which will become significantly more challenging in the longer term with substantial projected growth in activity across our border and within our maritime zone. Rather than bringing key border functions together into a ‘single border agency', a whole of government strategic planning framework would better suit Australia. Such a framework should cover the full range of border management functions across all agencies, bringing them together to ensure they are consistent and complementary and that investment is appropriately prioritised.
Some particular border security issues will require further attention:
     * New data analysis and biometric techniques are available that would improve the identity and national security checking of non-citizens. Investment in this area will be required if Australia is to remain at world's best practice.
     * Quarantine services and the set targets for intervention do not sit well with the more advanced risk management approaches taken in relation to other border services. This is likely to be considered as part of the current Quarantine and Border Security Review.
     * Aviation security measures - including policing and screening of passengers and cargo - must be kept under review to ensure they are consistent and continue to be appropriate and effective. These measures must keep pace with forecast growth in the aviation sector. Consideration is needed of the implications of international flights into more Australian airports and of air cargo security issues. In view of the links between criminal activity and security threats at airports, the enhanced police presence at major airports which followed from the Wheeler report serves an important purpose. But the current Commonwealth-led model faces significant management challenges and should be reviewed in consultation with the states and territories.
Australia's maritime domain is large. Managing the threats is legally complex and involves many different agencies. Despite the challenges, risks posed by illegal foreign fishing and people smuggling have been well managed to date at the operational level and relationships between agencies are sound. Agencies are satisfied with the increasingly effective role of the Border Protection Command. Customs' processes for planning their strategic capability requirements are maturing and should place the Government well for the major decisions that will be needed as the existing patrol boat fleet ages.
That said, there is scope to streamline the legal framework for maritime enforcement activity, to improve the budget information available to government, and to better integrate search and rescue and other operational functions. While the Government could choose to re-name the Border Protection Command as a ‘Coastguard', the current substantive arrangements should be retained and built upon rather than revamped.
Partnerships
Addressing the threats we face is clearly not a task for one agency, or any one government, acting in isolation. Many current threats are cross jurisdictional or transnational in nature. In many areas it is businesses or the general community that are threatened. And the capabilities and capacities to take action for identifying, preparing for, responding to and recovering from incidents lie not just with governments but also with business and the community.
The Australian Government therefore depends on a series of partnerships to help in its task of safeguarding Australia. The NSA will need to work closely with both government and industry partners, and should do so on the basis of a clear appreciation of the appropriate role of the Commonwealth in critical areas.
States and territories
States and territories have a primary role in responding to many of the threats we face. They have engaged with the Commonwealth in developing common national approaches to counter-terrorism. The National Counter-Terrorism Committee is a salient case of Australia's nine governments working effectively together to counter a particular threat. In other areas the Commonwealth's role is regarded with varying degrees of equivocation by state and territory governments. As noted above, there is scope for greater national collaboration in areas such as policing and emergency management.
Business
Businesses in Australia and Australian businesses abroad face a number of threats. While business owners and operators must manage these risks themselves, there is nevertheless a responsibility on government to assist business to understand and mitigate the threats they face. Current arrangements for protecting Australia's critical infrastructure - which is largely privately owned - are generally regarded as a significant improvement on past efforts, and highlight the success of a partnership approach.
Community
Governments are increasingly working in partnership with communities to mitigate the impact of disasters at the local level, and ensure communities are resilient. Of the other components of national security, it is counter-terrorism that is the most sensitive in terms of public confidence and the impact on community relations. While ‘counter radicalisation' programs like those in the United Kingdom have their place, it is important for governments to work closely together in this area and to be clear about their respective roles and the perceptions their activities may generate.
Commonwealth contribution
The Australian Defence Force and agencies of the Defence Department have built significant expertise and capability that can be used in domestic security and emergency management and response. Other agencies work beyond the border to protect Australian interests overseas and mitigate threats to Australia at their origin. These significant contributions to national security should be sustained and mechanisms developed to better quantify their value.
 Documents
    First National Security Statement - RTF 400KB | PDF 127KB 
    Summary and Conclusions - Report of the Review of Homeland and Border Security RTF 125KB | PDF 121KB 


PM: Thanks very much Brendan and Tim and Premier John Brumby and Albo, the Minister for Infrastructure, Maria Vamvakinou, everyone else. It is good to be here. The Government is committed to nation building. Nation building is about infrastructure and what we see here is a first class piece of infrastructure being laid out for the people of Melbourne and the people of Victoria.
And our Government is proud to be partners with the Victorian Government in building this infrastructure. 
We are investing some $900 million in this great project for this part of Australia. And this is going to be a good thing. Good infrastructure but also at a time like this, a good investment in the national economy.
If you put together our investment with that of the Victorian Government, we are creating here, construction jobs in the order of about 6500 over time and some 5500 flow on jobs. Important stimulus for the economy at the time of the global financial crisis into the future and secondly, importantly also laying out critical road infrastructure for this important part of Australia's national economy. The other thing of course is this - it helps people in their work a day lives. It helps people get to where they need to get quicker. And that is what we are on about as federal and state governments in partnership with each other, delivering better services for the taxpayers of Australia.
And that is what this piece of road infrastructure is all about. Specifically, what we the Federal Government have done is bring forward our commitment. We said last year that we would invest $900 million into this road and we are going to do that. 
Today we are honouring that commitment given to the people of Victoria, the people of Melbourne, prior to the last election; a commitment of nearly one billion dollars. But beyond that, because of the challenges that we face in bringing forward infrastructure to support the national economy, we have also brought forward some of that money to construct this early part of this road here with the Victorian Government and also invested a further allocation of funds to do the project design and detailed design work on the rest of the road early, so that construction for the entire system of the road can be brought forward as well.
That is why we are here today. So this national Government of ours is proud of its partnership with the Victorian Government because we together with the Victorian Government, believe in nation building. We believe in infrastructure. We believe in putting our shoulder to the wheel and making infrastructure work. Critical for the economy long term, critical for stimulus of the economy in the shorter term and importantly, delivering services to working families, trying to get to work on time. Over to you John.
BRUMBY: Well thank you very much to the Prime Minister and to the Federal Ministers who are here today to Brendan, to Anthony Albanese, to Tim Pallas, the state member and Federal Members. It is absolutely fantastic to see the Prime Minister in Melbourne today.
And of course this day last week, we were in Canberra for the historic COAG meeting.
And it was an historic meeting because it was all about the Federal Government working in partnership with the State Governments to end the blame game, to bring forward works, to bring forward funds, to do more for Australia and to work together in an era of cooperative federalism.
And you see that again today with this project. This is a project of course which was, as we have heard, promised by the Prime Minister when he was Opposition Leader. But today what we are doing is starting work bringing forward this project, the first $12 million of this project and then as you have heard from the Prime Minister, bringing forward the second part of that, $900 million from the Federal Government, $300 million from us, in a project which will generate something like 6000 direct jobs and 5500 indirect jobs.
And so it is a great example of working together. It is a great example of when Governments work together. You can bring forward projects, you can make the investment and you can generate the jobs that we need at this time of global economic slowdown.
Can I also say it is great to see Anthony Albanese here and it is only a couple of months ago, we were in Wodonga when we were both operating the (inaudible) the digger there for a $501 million partnership on North East rail standardisation. And again, couldn't have happened under the former Howard Government.
Funding provided by the Rudd Government: $501 million of investment in nation building rail infrastructure. Improving our freight system, improving the efficiency of it, improving the economy and generating jobs on the way through.
This is a key road for our state. I said to the PM a few moments ago I would say something about his home state of Queensland and I will. We love Queensland but  - 
PM: Why are you saying but?
BRUMBY: But the point I want to make, it is an important point to make for the Prime Minister while he is here in Melbourne. The last six months, the state which has added more people than any other state in Australia is Victoria. 
You know, twenty years ago, if you said that Victoria was going to be outgrowing Queensland in terms of population, people would have laughed at you. But the last six months Victoria has added more people than any other State in Australia. And the reason I mention that is because it puts pressure on our transport system.
It means congestion in our transport system unless Governments work together to tackle it. And that is why the bring-forward of this road project is so important. This road, the Western Ring road is about 140,000 vehicles a day. 16 percent of those vehicles are freight. And so the investments we make here don't just mean that families can spend more time together. I don't just mean that motorists will save 20 minutes when this project is complete, 20  -  25 minutes.
It makes the efficiency of the freight system in our State and across Australia so much better than it would otherwise be. And at a time when we need to compete against the rest of the world and a more competitive era than ever before, this sort of investment, giving families more time and making our freight system more efficient is so, so important.
So Prime Minister we are delighted with your leadership, we are delighted that you have brought forward this project and this road, which so many Victorians use every day. This road will be immeasurably improved by the bring-forward of funding and the substantial investment that we are partnering together on today. So we thank you for that.
PM: Thank you John. Any questions from the ladies and gentleman of the press?
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister what is the and how do you reconcile this with the news earlier this week that Victoria is growing at a rate it can't sustain?
PM: Well this is a growth State as Premier John Brumby said before. There are two alternatives for the Federal Government. One is the script used in the past which said, basically ‘over to you John, you are on your own' or our approach, which is how can partner with you. We take the second approach. It costs us money.
What we did in the Premiers conference - Council of Australian Governments meeting last Saturday - was decide as an Australian Government to provide an addition $15.1 billion to the states and territories for the four to five year period ahead. On top of what was provided in the past.
That is partnership, putting your money where your mouth is, it is bringing about a series of national reforms, but on infrastructure, also indicating clearly that we will partner with the states and territories as well.
I am for growing the national economy. Victoria is a huge slice of the national economy. In a time of global financial crisis, we want to support every state and territory and this one here has so much to give to Australia into the future.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) 
PM: Well I am not across the detail of the State Government's transport plan, I am sure Albo has been over it and up it like a rat up a drainpipe, have you mate? (Inaudible) 
So we will take each thing step by step but I say this loudly and clearly that in the past the Australian Government said on infrastructure this was not a job for the Australian Government, it was only a job for State Governments.
When you have growth, where you have massive pressure on roads, rail, ports, broadband, hospitals, universities across the country because of growing population, the conclusion we have reached as the national Government is that there is only one path for the future and that is for us to be partners in infrastructure into the future.
But can I just add one thing on that. At a time of global financial crisis, we the Government stand for nation building and at this time the Liberal Party federally are divided right down the middle on nation building. And they can't even agree on who should build a sand castle. They can't even agree on who should have the bucket and who should have the spade.
We have a clear strategy for the future, it is called nation building. They have none. They are divided right down the middle.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) ANZ has announced today that they are cutting more jobs than earlier stated, trade unions say they are using the financial crisis as an excuse to sack workers, do you think that is right?
PM: Well on the details of ANZ's announcement, I am not familiar. Any person losing their job during the global financial crisis, it is a difficult and awful time for that person and for the families who depend on that person for an income and for support.
Our job as a community and through our systems of support is to do whatever we can to soften the blow with individual firms, to help where we can and to help also through the income payment and support systems offered by the Federal Government.
This will be a tough year ahead. I have tried to level with the Australian people about this. '09 will be very hard on employment and unemployment. One of the reasons John and I are here today is to say, in the midst of the pile of global economic gloom, we are helping to step into the (inaudible) supporting infrastructure now because it generates jobs.
In this case, 6500 direct, some 5500 plus indirect, over time. That is doing something constructive about the global financial crisis.
JOURNALIST: Do you feel a bit ripped off by the ANZ, you guaranteed bank deposits (inaudible)
PM: Every individual company faces different circumstances, our first responsibility has been to do whatever the Australian Government can do to underpin the stability of the Australian financial system. Bear this fact in mind. Worldwide right now I am advised, something like 13 AA banks remaining, AA rated banks.
Australia has four of that 13 globally. It is partly because we have run the regulatory system in this country in a conservative way. But it is also because we the Australian Government have been keen and active in supporting our regulators doing their job.
On top of that, the stability of the financial system, we have acted also decisively to guarantee 15 million individual deposit accounts around the country, for all Australians. And secondly to provide a guarantee for the banks to be able to raise money offshore so that businesses out here in this part of Melbourne can still have the possibility of accessing corporate finance into the future.
If the finance dries up, and in many parts of the world it is drying up, then you have a massive problem on your hands. This is going to be hard, it will be difficult, I accept that and I have said that from the beginning. Our job is to make a difference.
JOURNALIST: The finance sector unions says that the bank guarantees (inaudible)
PM: As I said before, each individual banks' circumstances are different. We would encourage and urge the banks to continue to provide maximum employment for their workforces. That is the right thing to do.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: And it is important that we as Governments, state and federal also do what we can to support economic activity in the economy. Can I say, as of Monday this week, the 8th of December, there begins to flow through some eight to nine billion dollars in stimulus to the general economy through our economic security strategy.
Why are we doing that? Because we know that out there in the economy, small businesses, right through to the financial institutions themselves are feeling the pressure arising from a reduction in demand in the economy.
That is why we are injecting nearly $10 billion through measures for pensioners, for families and to support first home buyers.
It is step one in our economic security strategy to help support growth and jobs into the future when the global financial crisis is reaping its havoc.
JOURNALIST: Are you disappointed that ANZ has made this announcement not only after it got (inaudible)
PM: I would urge all the banks to do whatever they can to maintain their employment levels into the future. This is a very difficult set of economic circumstances for everybody. It is very difficult for families as well. 
Our job in the economy is to provide continued support for growth and for activity at a time when we are going to see a whole lot of trouble out there in the workforces of Australia because of the global financial crisis. There is no single silver bullet solution to this. Our job as the Government is to continue to support economic activity through the measures that I have outlined.
JOURNALIST: (Inaudible)
PM: Well Australia's superannuation laws have been long established.
JOURNALIST: What about infrastructure, would you like to see State Governments have more of a focus on providing public transport rather than continuing to focus on providing more roads?
PM: Can I say, that belongs squarely within the province of the Victorian Government. In terms of  - 
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: No let me just answer that in this broad sense. Effective infrastructure planning is done at the state level. What I have seen in infrastructure planning in the state of Victoria is they are pretty good at it. We can all do better, and that is us as well at the federal level in terms of what we do.
But the integration of what is best done for road, what is best done for rail, what is best done for freight rail, what is best done for passenger rail, these are detailed questions which are particular to every locality.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Look our attitude is very simple, there is a global financial crisis under way, it is having a huge effect on the global economy and its impact will be felt on the Australian economy. Step by step we will take every action we deem to be necessary to continue to support growth and jobs.
This will be very hard, there are global forced bearing down on us. We have done an economic security strategy, ahead of the curve ahead of most other countries and that represents some $10 billion.
We have also released this $15.1 billion to the states, some $3 billion plus of which will flow additionally in the year ahead. Beyond that we have further infrastructure announcements to make ourselves. Can I say we will do this each step of the way, mindful of what needs to be done to continue to support growth and jobs. But the task will be really hard. And let me repeat one thing I said before.
At a time of global financial crisis, what the nation expects is strong leadership on nation building. And what we have is a Liberal Party divided right down the middle on nation building and on infrastructure and I thing at a time like this, is an absolute disgrace.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: I say that it is relevant to use because it affects votes in the Senate. Minister Albanese has been burning the midnight oil to secure passage of the legislation which underpins our future ability to invest in national infrastructure projects. The Liberals can't work out whether they are Arthur or Martha in the Senate.
It's not a question of making a political comment, it is a basic fact of the numbers in the Senate to ensure passage of support for the legislation which underpins our ability to invest in infrastructure in the future. That is why it is relevant and that is why I am making the comments I have.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Well firstly on the detail on the funding arrangements, I would prefer to be better briefed on that. That's the first point. The second is on these sorts of decisions, are best done on the basis of the (inaudible) advice of medical specialists dealing with individual women. If politicians were to get involved in those processes I think is frankly, a recipe for disaster. It is the right thing that this be handled sensibly, properly and professionally by medical specialists who know what they're talking about.


Thank you all for coming out on a Sunday afternoon to meet with us here in this meeting of the Federal Cabinet, the Cabinet of the Australian Government here in Geelong and here at Corio Bay senior college.
Thank you also to the staff and the students at Corio Bay Senior College for turning out and welcoming us today in the way in which they have.
Think of this: Year 12 students, the school captains, having to come back and greet me on the 7th of December and put their school uniforms back on again.
There is no higher calling than to have to put your school uniform back on again, and come back and pretend that you haven't already left the place.
They are great kids and they are both waiting eagerly their notifications of acceptance to university. One in Melbourne, one here in Deakin. So we wish them well for their futures.
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet and whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
And thank you for the welcome to country from David Tournier and Jason Tournier for your didgeridoo playing. And thank you for making us feel so welcome here today on behalf of the Wathaurong people.
Can I begin by introducing my colleagues, because we have got a good line of folk here today. Beginning up on the far left and contrary to the list that I have been given, it always pays to read it carefully  -  I have Anthony Byrne, who is Parliamentary Secretary to myself as Prime Minister (inaudible), Bill Shorten who is Parliamentary Secretary for disabilities, Tanya Plibersek the Minister for Housing. We have Robert McClelland the Attorney General, we have Kim Carr the Industry Minister.
Stephen Conroy, the Minister for Communications, Lindsay Tanner, hiding behind the (inaudible) make sure you ask him a very hard question (inaudible) he is the Finance Minister, known affectionately in our show as Dr No.
Justine Elliot, who is the Minister for Aged Care, today also representing the Minister for Health. John Faulkner, Special Minister of State and Cabinet Secretary, Julia Gillard, Deputy Prime Minister of Australia.
We drove through her electorate on the way here today, and it is a fine electorate indeed. So my best regards to the people of Lalor who are next door.
We also have to my right Joel Fitzgibbon who is the Minister for Defence, Jenny Macklin, the Minister for Families, Anthony Albanese the Minister for Infrastructure, so all questions about local road funding go to him.
Peter Garrett, the Minister for the environment, Joe Ludwig the Minister for Human Services and Rich and Darren, I think you have already met them.
Could I say as Prime Minister how delighted I am by the work that they put in as local members. You in this community should feel proud of the fact that your two local members spent a long time getting in the face of the Prime Minister.
If there is stuff happening here, we soon hear about it. And that is what a local member is supposed to do. And you have two very good local members in this community to do that, not just with me, but right across the ministers of this cabinet who are here assembled before you today.
So they have done a really good job. And we have still got hard work to do, as Richard just said, it is going to be a tough year ahead. But in terms of getting their message through to us, they are your first port of call.
And they are very effective at getting the message delivered to us.
This community cabinet is what we as a new Australian Government do. And it is deliberate. It is intentional. It is now our practice and our achievement as well.
Right around Australia this year we have sought every month or so to take the Cabinet out of Canberra and take the Cabinet to the people. And we have done so in Penrith in Western Sydney, we have done so in the outer suburbs of Brisbane, we have been to Mackay in North Queensland, Indigenous communities in Arnhem Land. We have taken the Cabinet to southern suburbs of Perth, the southern suburbs of Adelaide.
We have been most recently to Launceston in Tasmania and we are here with this great community in Geelong.
And can I say there is one single reason for us doing it - now having taken the cabinet to every state and territory in the country in our first year in office - and that is, to keep in touch with what you the community expect of us.
It is really easy to get disconnected by virtue of spending so much of your time in Canberra. It happens. Therefore one of the best antidotes we can have is to take the cabinet out of town.
And your opportunity today to ask us questions, difficult or easy, make comments, supportive or critical, meet with us one on one afterwards, it is all part and parcel of the process. And for us it is really important to remain plugged in with what working families across Australia, pensioners, carers and others, are expecting of their Government, their national Government, at a time of unprecedented global financial and economic challenge.
You have read a lot about the global financial crisis. A lot in the newspapers. A lot of gloom and doom. And 2009 will be a difficult year and we will see a reduced growth in the Australian economy and we will see higher unemployment. I see no point at all in trying to gild the lily with the Australian people. We are in tough times. There will be tough times next year.
But my overriding message to you all is this: if we as a country stick together, and recognise the fact that we are all in this together, then we will see Australia through. Business and unions, employers, employees, Government and business, Government and community, national Governments working with State Governments, national Governments with state Government and local Government.
We are all in this together. And those around the world who will come through this virtually unprecedented global financial and economic crisis, those who come through this well, will be those who stick together, recognise the fundamental fact that we are in it together.
(inaudible) right across the show, from business, from unions, from Government, often doing things we have never done before, unusual things that we have never done before, but necessary things in order to see us all through.
And for those who get damaged and wounded on the way through, to be there to actually extend a helping hand and a supportive hand. That is what being Australian is all about. We are in this together, we will come through this together and our responsibility as members of the great Australian family is to extend support to each other when the times get tough.
The Government's response to the global financial crisis has been, one, to stabilise the Australian financial system. We did that by providing a government guarantee to bank deposits right across the country, 15 million of them, to make sure that each person could be confident about their deposits in their bank, necessary in order to underpin confidence in our financial system.
But further to provide a guarantee to our major banks so that they can continue to secure funding from the international financial markets so that they can in turn continue to deliver finance to businesses across the country and other investment purposes across the country to keep the wheels of the economy rolling.
Stabilising the financial system is just step one. Step two has been to support the economy, growth and jobs. And that is why in October we delivered a $10.4 billion Economic Security Strategy.
This Strategy is designed to underpin growth and underpin jobs when around the rest of the world you see one economy after another sliding into recession or you see unemployment rising in one economy after another around the world, and where in this country we have sought to act as early and as decisively as possible to support growth and to support jobs.
What does a $10.4 billion stimulus package mean? It delivers relief to pensioners, to carers, to families and first home buyers.
In fact, two million Australian families and four million pensioners will begin to receive their payments under the Government's Economic Security Strategy over the coming fortnight. Single pensioners will receive $1,400 and pensioner couples $2,100.
And around two million parents will receive a payment of $1,000 for the 3.9 million Australian children in their care.
The consequence of these payments, together with what we are doing with first home buyers - which is to effectively treble the first home owners allowance to $21,000 to support those buying their first home when they are buying a new home, and thereby to support the housing industry - is overall to continue to support jobs as well.
Supporting families, supporting pensioners, supporting first home buyers, but through the additional activity which comes in the economy as a result of doing that, also supporting jobs.
And that $10.4 billion I have spoken of before is capable of creating 75,000 additional jobs across the economy in the period ahead. That is why we are doing it, that is why we are doing it.
My message to these two million families and four million pensioners receiving these payments is to go out and spend this money that you receive to help make ends meet.
Because by spending their payments, families and pensioners will help create more jobs across Australia, and strengthen the Australian economy.
That's important.
These payments start arriving tomorrow, just 17 days before Christmas, and I urge families and pensioners who have been doing it tough to spend their payments in a responsible way to make their Christmas all the more special, and also do their bit to support the economy and jobs as well.
That is why we are acting.
Of course the Economic Security Strategy I have spoken of is just stage one.
Stage two is being what we have done longer term to support the automobile industry. The Industry Minister Kim Carr and I have spent a lot of time working with car manufacturers this year on the necessary package to support jobs in this critical sector of our economy and doubly critical sector of this regional economy around Geelong.
A $6.2 billion new car plan for Australia. That's a lot of investment and the reason we are doing that is because we believe in the future of manufacturing.
We believe in the future of the car industry. We also believe that the role of Government is not just to stand back and have a look and say, ‘gee there are some problems in that industry, I wonder what is going to happen'.
That is called observing, that is called watching. At worst it is called commenting or commentating. The alternative is to do something and to lead.
We chose the latter. And that is why we are investing this money over a long period of time, to give the industry over a 10 year time horizon, confidence and certainty about what Government will do to support the industry in order to enable the industry to transform itself.
To transform itself in the direction of cleaner, greener cars, which Australian consumers will want in the future. That is what it is about. That transformation within the industry, serving our environmental objectives, but equally importantly, serving our employment objectives.
And as Richard mentioned before, within a very short time of the Minister Kim Carr and I announcing that package for this region, we have had Ford turn around on the decision to which they had announced back in 2007, and instead make it absolutely clear that the Geelong engine plant would remain open for business. I regard that as a positive step forward.
It doesn't mean that all problems are solved. It doesn't mean that at all. There is going to be tough times ahead and we will see bad news as well. But what I am saying to you today as good members of this very good community is that we intend to be long term partners in this community's progress.
And that means supporting decisively, effectively, intelligently, the development of local industry. And that includes the automotive industry.
The automotive industry has been under stress at multiple levels, and another way in which we are seeking to help the industry is the special purpose vehicle which was announced with the support of the Australian banks quite recently.
And that was to assist with the provision of car finance across the country. Car finance has been threatened by the withdrawal of a number of the leading car finance firms. If you don't have car finance firms you have got a problem on your hands in terms of car dealerships and their ability to operate.
And if they are not operating effectively, guess what happens? It boomerangs back to the car manufacturers and then you have got a problem.
So together with the major banks and the Government, we have established this temporary special purpose facility to try and plug the gap which has arisen as a result of the impending withdrawal of some of the private providers of car finance in Australia.
And I would like to publicly acknowledge the support we have received from the CEOs of the Commonwealth Bank, the National Australia Bank, Westpac and ANZ together with representatives of the automotive industry, and in particular the Motor Traders Association of Australia.
This again is one practical step that we have taken and this facility will be in its overall projected size probably in the vicinity of some $2 billion. But the purpose is to make sure in these very difficult times, that we can help see the industry through.
The alternative is to stand back and say, ‘it is all too hard, let's just observe, let's just watch'. Well, we are not like that. We want to get in there and pitch in and have a go.
Again, it won't solve all problems, but let me tell you, it is better than not acting and that for us is never a possibility.
Here at the local level, we have had a lot of engagement with local representatives both state and federal and our good friends at the Geelong Advertiser, where are they? Put your hand up Geelong Advertiser, we will come and get you later on.
On the question of the Geelong ring road. The Advertiser tells us this is priority number four in the region. Let me just put some facts on the table for you. I am pleased to report that the Australian Government is already delivering on this project.
We have committed nearly $300 million to build the Geelong Ring Road.
The first three stages will open next Sunday following the community celebration day.
That means from next Monday, motorists will save up to 45 minutes in travel time and avoid 29 sets of traffic lights. There will be fewer cars and trucks through the centre of Geelong.
This is a very practical step forward in which we are proud to be co-investors.
We are also getting on with the job of completing the final stages of the Ring Road. Construction on stage 4A of the project will start in early 2009 and be done by early 2011. And Minister Albanese has recently approved $62.5 million in Commonwealth funding for this project.
So when it comes to the Geelong Ring Road, we have listened carefully to what the community has said to us through local representatives and we have acted and our funding is being delivered and I think that is a good thing for this community.
Finally in terms of others areas where we have been active locally, let me just mention a few.
On road projects apart from the Geelong Ring Road, stages one, two, three four, and four A that I have just referred to, we also have a $110 million allocated to the Princes Highway West upgrade duplication.
$20 million for the Geelong Mildura rail upgrade project. $50 million upgrade for rail access to the Port of Geelong. $7.5 million upgrade to Colac-Lavers Hill Road, together with other lesser road projects.
Mention was made before of education and the digital revolution in the classrooms. Here in this area, Trinity College Colac, Lorne-Aireys Inlet College, Colac College, Bellarine Secondary College, Corio Bay City College, where we are today and Geelong Baptist College  -  all recipients of funding for computers in schools.
And if I put those together, that is funding which comes to something like seven or eight hundred (inaudible) thousand dollars we have committed to the secondary schools in this area. All with one objective, and that is to ensure that we provide computers in the classroom, for years 9,10, 11 and 12.
The objective is to make sure that every kid has the best education possible.
Again, this doesn't solve all problems in education, it doesn't solve all problems in the classroom.
But I would much rather that every kid going to a secondary school in this part of Australia was given the same opportunities as others who have already got computers and laptops on their desks, in other parts of Australia.
That is what we are on about, making sure that every kid gets the best start on their education as possible.
In higher education, we have allocated $13.8 to Deakin University over the new Better Universities Renewal Fund. In health, $7 million towards a GP Super Clinic at Southern Geelong.
On water, $20 million for the Geelong Shell Water recycling project. $10 million for a new recycled water plant.
We have also had local Government funding coming out of the local community infrastructure program, including funding delivered at the recent meeting we had in Canberra of $2.5 million to the Greater Geelong City Council, $525,000 to Colac-Otway Shire Council. $469,000 to Goulburn Plains Shire Council, $343,000 to Surf Coast Shire Council, and $100,000 to Queenscliffe Borough Council.
And on sport and community facilities $14 million for the Geelong Football Club for the redevelopment of the Skilled Stadium, increasing the capacity by 3,000.
And I think you were robbed, by the way, in the Grand Final.
Can I say, also, the reason for running through that list is to indicate that in the 12 months that we have been in office, we have not just been busy nationally, we have sought to be active locally in funding a range of projects across roads, across schools, across the local university of Deakin, across local community health facilities, as well as sport and community infrastructure as well.
And for us this is simply the beginning of our investment with you, as well as supporting local government.
As I close, can I say you live in a wonderful part of Australia.
Therese, my wife, the kids and I have holidayed in this part of the world before, down to the Great Ocean Road, driven it. And as loyal sons and daughters of the great state of Queensland, it sort of passed people's minds in Queensland as passing strange that you'd spend a summer not on the beach in Queensland, but down here.
But you know we didn't regret it one bit. You have an extraordinarily beautiful part of Australia. It is stunning. It is remarkable. It is beautiful and you should be proud of it.
And proud of those communities associated with the great assets which mother nature has delivered to you. Enough from me, and now it is over to you.


Today is a story about defence, it is a story about industry, it is a story about jobs and it is a story about Geelong. And let me say a few things about each of those. 
This is an important part of Australia's defence architecture.
If you look at these aircraft here, the Royal Australian Air Force in doing its job relies upon air decoys to be protected. And each time I have flown into Iraq and flown into Afghanistan I have been fully briefed on the importance of these particular devices.
This is making our air force safer to do its job when called upon to do its job. And I congratulate those who have added their professional expertise here to making that job easier for Australia because without an effective national defence, ultimately, our security and as a consequence, everything else is compromised.
Industry, you know something? This Government believes in industry policy. We make no apology for that. We believe in being partners with industry, and where we can, putting our shoulder to the wheel with industry to make their job a bit easier.
And through this allocation from the Geelong investment and innovation fund, to make it possible for Chemring to grow its business. Grow its business not just now but into the future as well, because we believe in businesses like this, businesses which have shown a long track record of commitment to Australia. 100 years is quite a long time between drinks, in terms of when you have started and when you are still going.
So we think they are reasonably reliable partners. But this is important for us to be partners, partners with industry not just here but as the Industry Minister said just before, with the automotive industry, the automotive supplies industry, the fact that we and the Victorian Government can work together to assist companies like Ford and turn critical decisions around.
The Government is proud of its $6.2 billion car plan for the future. It is part of our co-investment with industry into the future.
There's a lot of gloom and doom out there, a lot of problems in the global economy at present. And if we all got paid a dollar for every time we turn over the page of a newspaper to find another negative story about something happening somewhere else in the world, then we would all earn a lot of money.
But guess what, that doesn't get you anywhere. What gets you somewhere is actually sitting down with business and working something through and that is what we have done at a very practical level here, with this very good business.
Which brings me to jobs. It is not just supporting defence, not just supporting industry, it is making sure that we can also generate jobs. I was with the Victorian Premier yesterday and we were launching a significant new $900 million Commonwealth investment in road projects here in greater Melbourne.
Very important for Melbourne, important for Victoria, but important for the nation. By virtue of that investment, we are investing in jobs. Some 5000  -  6000 in the construction phase and in terms of indirect jobs, another 5000 or 6000.
But you know it is not just the big projects like that, it is smaller ones because they all add up. They all make it count and so by virtue of our investment here into this business, important for defence and important for industry, we are also creating a capacity for Chemring to add another 40 staff.
So at a time when people have nothing but gloom and doom to talk about, our attitude is, well people can do that if they want, we are going to get on with the business of growing the nation, growing industry and growing jobs wherever we practically can and we are proud of being partners here.
Of course, in the future, it is entirely possible that with the JSF, the Joint Strike Fighter project, that Chemring as a consequence of this investment is capable then of lodging a successful bid for new work coming off the JSF.
JSF final decisions are a ways away yet but if that were to come off then the employment consequences again for this firm Chemring in providing air decoys for an entire new generation or part thereof of Australian fighter aircraft, would be significant indeed.
Each is a building step. Each is a building block along the way.
Which brings me to my last point, about Geelong. You know this is a community which has got I would say, intestines of steel. They have seen ups and downs over the years but always have come through, and come through with flying colours.
And you see that through the great strength and enduring strength of what we have seen in the automotive industry, despite the knocks, despite the hits, despite the whacks over time. And I have already said something about our commitment for that recently, through the agency of the Industry Minister, Kim Carr, and through the support we have received directly in partnership with the Government of Victoria.
But this is a great community. It is a great community because it believes in industry and it believes in picking itself up, working with Governments at all levels and looking at, how can we now secure the future again.
And that is what we are in the business of doing and that is why we are here to bring our cabinet to Geelong today.
So these are four very good stories. About our defence, about industry, about jobs and growing jobs. But also about supporting this great community which is a great part of Australia.


I was concerned by what John Hartigan just said. He said that this A-Span was about live coverage as it happens of the internal machinations of government. Conroy, you told me none of that before I accepted the brief to be here this morning  -  you're in deep trouble.
Also, the thought that Steve just suggested that this is going to be the subject of, shall we say, broadcast to the United States and other parts of the world  -  I'm looking forward to the subtitling service which will now become a boutique industry. Rendered in American English ‘you scumbag', underneath it being registered ‘this is not deemed in Australia to be a desirable person'.
‘You sleazebag on wheels'  -  this is deemed in Australia to being an even less desirable person. I think there's a whole boutique business which will be spawned out of this in terms of the subtitling of Australian English.
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet and whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
It's great to be among such a distinguished gathering of Australian journalists and therefore, given that we're here to launch A-Span, I can't let the chance go by without saying something about the story of the day and that's the economic security strategy - $10.4 billion.
I've urged pensioners and families to spend this money responsibly, to use this money to make ends meet, to help out their kids, to help out their grandkids and they're going to be doing that in the time ahead. And I know the government will inevitably face some criticism about how some of this money will be spent.
Tthe government understood this reality when it embraced this stimulus package but we decided then and we believe now that one-off cash payments to pensioners, carers and young families were the best way to stimulate the economy.
If the government doesn't empower consumers at a time like this in the midst of global financial crisis, then in fact, we'll have even greater challenges ahead.
So the government understands that we'll be criticised for how some of this money is spent, but the alternative is for government to do nothing to stimulate the economy, for government not to invest in jobs, in growth, in families and this government, by contrast, has resolved to act.
To the business of the day  -  A-Span. It's almost 30 years to the day that a young Congressman named Al Gore stood to speak in the United States House of Representatives and made history with the first broadcast on C-Span.
From that moment, C-Span promised that Americans would have gavel-to-gavel television coverage of every session of Congress.
Since that day, March of '79, a generation of Australians visiting the United States have had the experience of stumbling across C-Span while sitting in a hotel room recovering from insomnia, unable to sleep at all, flicking through 50 to 60 cable television stations and chancing upon a US Congressional Committee on a subject unknown to any other people on the planet, dealing with deliberations, obscure only to that particular group of Americans concerned with it, but a half an hour later, you find yourself totally engrossed in the deliberations of said committee.
And with firm views about the intelligence levels of various members of the committee  -  in other words, those who rely exclusively on notes to participate and those that can actually run with an argument.
It's good stuff and I've always enjoyed it.
Consistently, C-Span educates and informs its viewers, giving them a fly-on-the-wall view of what's happening on Capitol Hill.
Australians returning from the United States have often asked a simple question  -  why don't we have our own C-Span?
This same question as John has just indicated was asked this year at the Australia 2020 Summit here in Parliament House.
As the final report of the Summit concluded, participants felt that there was a need for first-hand, unedited access to the records of public policy debates.
A program along the lines of C-Span in the United States or Canada could be established.
An Australian version of C-Span, what they called AuSpan  -  this is in the 2020 Summit  -  will make a big difference to the public policy debate.
It was hoped that a public affairs digital network would be established by 2020.
Well, you've got cracking  -  I'm impressed by that. As John Hartigan said 11 years ahead of time.
The name's almost the same  -  AuSpan's become A-Span and it's a very good thing.
Today's announcement on behalf of A-Span is I think a good thing for our democracy. It's a superb initiative, it's 100 per cent industry funded.
A-Span will be available to 2.2 million subscribers and 7 million Australians who pay to subscribe to Pay TV.
Importantly, it will also be available to Australians to watch online.
The launch of A-Span is therefore good news for all.
Political junkies will of course love it  -  they'll now have one more way to drive their family and friends absolutely mad.
But A-Span will also be valuable for the wider public  -  students, for educators, for people following a particular policy debate, and for all Australians who want to understand more about how democracy works and how they could become more involved in it.
A-Span is therefore good for Australian democracy. I think one of the charges we all face as those who participate in the workings and life of this great democratic institution is thinking of the generation ahead  -  how do you breathe life into it again? How do you actually sustain the arteries and the life force of a democracy?
The debate about right to know, which John has been so intimately involved in, the debate about how we bring more meaningfully the deliberations of this place and the other legislatures of Australia, into the lives of Australians. I think each generation of politicians has a responsibility to make sure that the institutions are kept not just alive and well but reformed, reshaped, transmitted to those who come after us.
You know this great kernel of an idea called democracy is actually quite young in the history of nations, of modern nations. The experiments in Athens we know about, but in the rise of modern nation states, this is effectively a 20th Century phenomenon.
And therefore, each of us has this charge to transmute again and I believe this is a way in which it can be helped and helped done effectively.
Think also of what could have happened in times past had we had A-Span in operation.
It could have caught live on film for all to see, and entertained everyone, Gough Whitlam throwing a glass of water over Paul Hasluck, imagine what that would have been like as a captured piece of footage. The great speeches of Fred Daley and Jim Killen.
Or in more recent times, Tony Abbott squaring up to Her Majesty's loyal opposition at the time, ready to knock their lights out on the floor of the House of Representatives. Paul Keating's great exultation to John Hewson that he was about to ‘do him slowly'.
If this was done resplendently across live television across the country, I am sure it would have had a palpable impact on the body politic, for good or for ill I am not sure. But it would have been for real, live and unplugged.
We would have had full and dynamic displays of all of our best parliamentarians from both sides of the chamber. And I think that does well also for the life of our democracy.
Think also of bringing live to people around the country, the deliberations of Robert Ray and John Faulkner in earlier lives, as part of that team of grand inquisitors engaged in the Senate Estimates process, good cop, bad cop, or as they like to say, ‘bad cop and worse cop', in the Estimates process.
And I think that, the Estimates process when properly conducted is a great exercise again in the way in which the Australian lifeblood of democracy is continued into the future.
A-Span will be a valuable addition to existing news offerings. It will complement the coverage already provided by the ABC, Sky News and by the Parliament's own website. It will show the substantive debates and processes that represent democracy at work.
Australians will be able to see and understand our parliamentary processes more easily than ever before. A-Span will not just be a one-way process between Government and the Australian people, it will also give voice to many others in the public debate through its coverage of significant meetings held by major private institutions.
That means a better educated public, a more informed public debate and stronger democracy.
The Australian Government strongly supports new steps to strengthen our way of governing and to constantly reinvent the way in which the country is governed. One small contribution by those of us in the political process is what we did yesterday again in Geelong, taking cabinet to the community.
This is the eighth or ninth occasion we have done this, this year. And for those who are here as members of the parliamentary press gallery, it is, I have got to say, a live and raw experience dealing with communities upfront, personal, all ministers present, or most of them, with a gathering of people from that local community. From members of the La Rouche Society at one end of the spectrum, through to others at another end of the spectrum and all points in between.
But you know something? And I think Sky from time to time has covered our community cabinets, the playback we have had from the community at large, about cabinets engaging people at the local level, has been very good.
It is not that we expect to be patted on the head by the community when we go to each place, in fact that is rarely the case. You often cop it between the eyeballs and that is as it should be.
But it is a good thing. It is part of reinvigorating a democracy and maybe that flows in to the coverage which will come from A-Span as well.
Community cabinet, is as I said, a part of the Government remaining engaged with the local community and rejuvenating our democracy. And A-Span will give Australia a new window into the parliament and the workings of Government.
A-Span will also give Australians a window on to other English speaking democracies including the United States Congress, the House of Commons in the United Kingdom and other major parliaments and this is a good thing as well.
I would also like to congratulate A-Span on the relationship it has established with C-Span which will allow program content from the Australian parliament and from around Australia to be sent to the US for broadcast on C-Span.
I am not still entirely sure what our American friends will make of it and 12 months into your return to the United States Robert, you could give us a first-hand analysis of how it is going down. My experience of America though is we will probably develop a thoroughly boutique and well informed audience of those who find Australian politics as their unique province of political connoisseurship.
And it will be fun to see. Six weeks from now, on January 20 2009, Barack Obama will be sworn in as America's 44th President and that will be a profoundly historic day, not just for the United States, the great democracy, but also an historic day for the world.
And the launch of A-Span on that day will take on an added significance therefore for Australia.
Congratulations to subscription television and Foxtel, Austar and Sky News for their work on this great initiative. An important initiative because I believe, as I have said already, the strength of democracy depends on well informed and an engaged citizenry.
I look forward to watching it. I hope many Australians become regular viewers. And on behalf of the Australian Government I welcome the official announcement of the launch of A-Span and so too today, as Prime Minister of Australia and current leader of this great democracy, I launch A-Span and all those who sail within her.


Distinguished colleagues. The job of a government is to serve and to protect its people. In doing so it is necessary to strike the right balance between allowing Governments to set policy directions and protecting the rights of its citizens.
Based on the evidence of history, our belief is that democratic governments are the best way of getting that balance right.
Democracy and development are good long term partners. As global geo-strategic and geo-economic weight shifts to the Asia Pacific region in the 21st Century, how Governments in our region seek to strike this balance now becomes a matter of global importance.
In this respect, I am taken by the remarks contained in a letter from Foreign Minister Hassan Wirajuda to colleagues in convening this forum.
The Foreign Minister said and I quote his letter, ‘the idea of such a forum is premised on the fact that Asia is the most populous region in the world's economic centre of gravity with an immense diversity of cultural heritages. Asia is therefore called upon to make a commensurate contribution to the political development of the world. And political development to my mind, means the growth and spread of democracy, the increasing participation of the people in the decision making processes that affect their lives and their future.'
That, I believe is an important statement.
I want to personally congratulate president Yudhoyono for his vision and his regional leadership in convening the Bali Democracy Forum.
It is a forum to consider the role of democracy and fostering peace and security and economic growth and development in the worlds' most populous region. I congratulate President Yudhoyono on his leadership of this nation and congratulate the people of Indonesia for the example they have set for the world.
The transformation of Indonesia has been extraordinary. It has been achieved peacefully and within Indonesia's constitutional framework. Indonesia is now the world's third largest democracy after India and after the United States.
And the people of Indonesia have themselves embraced democracy. (inaudible) it was my privilege to be here at the rebirth of Indonesia's democracy only 10 years ago. Then, as a young member of the Australian Parliament, I came here as a parliamentary monitor for the Indonesian elections of that year, 1999.
And I witnessed first-hand, the excitement and the exuberance and the enthusiasm of the people in the outer suburban areas of Surabaya where I spent a week watching the pre-election preparations, helping monitor the counting of the vote, and being there for the declaration of the results.
It was for me a very deep and moving experience and I would congratulate Indonesia and the people of Indonesia for the fact that today, voter turnout in this re-born democracy is among the highest in the world, consistently more than 75 percent.
Freedom of speech is valued at defended, it is underpinned by a vigorous and active media and today's meeting is convened in the spirit of Indonesia sharing its experiences with other nations. And so for these reasons I am proud to co-chair this meeting with President Yodhoyono.
Our two nations, Australian and Indonesia have different histories of democracy. But we are both fiercely proud of our democratic credentials. Democracy we would regard as a universal standard. Indonesia's Foreign Minister Dr Wirajuda referred to the need for the spread of democracy representing political development in his letter to participants. He said that we could assess political development by the degree to which people could participate in decision making processes that affected their lives.
I agree with that. Put simply, there is something fundamentally right about the idea that the people should be given a say in how they are governed. Democracy is neither the property of the west, nor is the property of the east. Democracy is the property of all human kind.
This is not just my view. It is reflected in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Sixty years ago, at a meeting presided over by Australia's foreign minister at the time - he was also serving as president of the General Assembly of the United Nations - we, the countries of the world, adopted the universal declaration.
Let us reflect on what we adopted within that declaration. Article 21, which sets out the basis for democracy, it says, and I quote, ‘the will of the people shall be the basis of the authority of government'.
By including these words, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights recognises that democracy is not restricted by ideology, by religion, by culture or by state of economic development. It proclaims that democracy is a universal standard to be aspired to by all peoples and all nations. This is our solemn declaration 60 years ago. This remains our solemn aspiration for all countries and all communities in the world.
Democracy is far from universal. In the Asia-Pacific, as in a lot of regions, democracy has not always been easy to achieve or readily embraced. Our job is to work to see its reach expanded. And through today's forum we can help to advance democracy. Through our discussions we can help to consolidate democracy. And through our discussions and deliberations we should seek to deepen our democracy.
His Excellency the President just referred to the fact that we need to build institutions to promote democracy within our region and to engage in the exchange of democratic ideas, processes and procedures.
These are the basics of democracy. Ensuring governments are aware of the needs of citizens and responding effectively to those needs; ensuring that our governments are accountable to the people for our decisions; fostering the free flow of information; fostering the competition for ideas; promoting a culture of participation and ensuring that the poor and the vulnerable are not left behind.
Every democracy has its own particular mechanisms. But what they have in common is that institutions such as parliaments, the judiciary and the media provide checks and balances on the exercise of power. And through these checks and balances people's voices are heard, their rights and interests are protected and we get the best outcomes.
I believe that Australia has something to share with others through this Bali Democracy Forum, in the spirit of cooperation described by Dr Wirajuda and President Yudhoyono.
Australia was among the first countries in the world to adopt a number of innovations, which today are considered basic principles of democracy. Australia counts itself as one of the world's five oldest continuing democracies.
In Australia we were the first to introduce the secret ballot. Together with our friends in New Zealand we were the first to recognise the right of women to vote. Australia is the first country in the world to give women the right to stand for parliament.
We are therefore proud of our history of democratic development. When the six States of Australia united to form a single country in 1901, it was done through a peaceful democratic vote.
Yet we also recognise that democracy is not static. The institutions of democracy need to be constantly reviewed and improved. In Australia, our Government has committed to increasing transparency and accountability. This is a continuing process. None of us ever arrive at a point of democratic perfection.
We are in Australia involved in the process of reforming freedom of information policies, reforming our electoral laws, reforming our laws concerning political donations and public funding. And we are committed to effective and responsive democracy. This is a continuing work and challenge for us all.
Our people also pass their judgment on democracy by whether it delivers the results. Does it deliver development? Does it protect its citizens? Does it allow different voices to be heard? And does it hold governments accountable?
When President Yudhoyono wrote to me inviting me to Co-Chair this forum, he wrote to me and said ‘the global situation demands from all governments a democratic response, that will effectively deliver good governance and socio-economic development while directly involving the citizenry in the decision-making processes that effect their lives and the future of their children.'
History shows that responsive democratic institutions can assist governments in responding to economic challenges in promoting growth.
The global economic crisis is in an immediate challenge for all of us. We need everyone to work together to develop the best responses. We need nations to work together. And within nations we need the private sector, government and the broader society to debate and to develop the best responses to the current crisis.
Democracy provides a channel for that to happen. Democracy is about open government and that means accepting the best answers might sometimes come from outside of government.
To conclude, the job of government is to serve and protect its people. The people are best served and protected by democracy. We need to support the development and spread of democracy within this, our region and our region will be the region of the 21st century.
We are all served if we have better governance and more democracy in our region. So Mr President, I would support your remarks that we through this forum, this important forum, the first time where governments of our region, as you said before have convened such a forum on democracy, rather than simply consigning it to the realm of academic discourse.
We've convened governments to talk about the future of democracy. Building on that I believe, flowing from this important Bali Democracy Forum, we should develop mechanisms to continue the dialogue among us (inaudible) power our practical processes within democracies can be developed and taken further. And for those who have not yet fully embraced the democratic path, how we can assist them in so doing.
Australia therefore, is proud to support Indonesia and President Yudhoyono in particular in this most significant and important regional initiative.
Building and consolidating democracy truly represents a strategic agenda for Asia. The title given to this forum, Setting a New Strategic Agenda for Asia is a good title. The 21st Century extends a challenge to all of us to rise to this new aspiration for our peoples. Mr President, I thank you.


Thank you very much. Premier John Brumby, former Federal Member for Bendigo, Steve Gibbons, present Federal Members for Bendigo. Steve has a remarkable power of gentle persuasion to get me to fly from Melbourne to Darwin, to Indonesia, to Melbourne and drive to Bendigo in 48 hours. Well done Steve.
Bob Cameron MP, State Member for Bendigo West, Jacinta Allan MP, State Member for Bendigo East, Damian Drum MLC, State Member North Western Province, Kevin Gibbons the Mayor of Bendigo, Robert Johanson, Chairman of Bendigo and Adelaide Bank and Rob Hunt, Managing Director, Bendigo and Adelaide Bank and you, the good citizens of Bendigo. It's good to be here.
And I too begin by acknowledging the First Australians on whose land we meet and whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
What a great day for Bendigo. What a fantastic day. Here we are on this wonderful sunny morning, in this great, vibrant regional centre, in regional Victoria, celebrating a great Australian regional and now national institution, the Bendigo Bank.
As I stand here this morning and look out at this crowd I am reminded very much of a community in regional Queensland I grew up in. The great thing about communities like this is that you stick together. You work together. You have a civic pride. You have a community pride. You believe in building local institutions. You believe in adding to them year on year, decade by decade, generation by generation.
And it's that great sense of continuity and commitment that I believe is the lifeblood of regional Australia. And you see it writ large in this great civic community, this great wider community of Bendigo and I congratulate you and the Bank on your contribution to the nation.
Bendigo has always has a special grace and special grandeur about its public buildings and its monuments. With the landmark buildings that speak of the city's origins from Gold Rush days, Bendigo has always been one of Australia's great regional cities.
Even as a kid growing up in regional Queensland, we learnt all about Bendigo. It was part of our grade three, grade four, grade five, grade six, grade seven curriculum at school.
But you know Bendigo is not just a city of the past. Bendigo is a city of the future.
With this outstanding new landmark, Bendigo says to the world  -  this is not just an historic city. This is now a very modern city. A city for the future.
This is a city that can drive innovation that changes the face of something as basic to towns and cities across our nation as community banking.
A few generations ago, Bendigo's Lyric Theatre stood where the Bendigo Centre now stands. I understand the Lyric Theatre was the hub of activity in its time.
Just as the Lyric Theatre brought the Bendigo community together on this site last century, the new Bendigo Centre revitalises the city centre today. Not just with a new place of work but also with new public space that the Premier has just opened, through the new Lyric Square.
The Bendigo Centre has also achieved the highest standards of environmental sustainability. In fact the builders have been unable to identify any other major building outside of a capital city that is Five Star Green Star rated.
It offers to save four and a half million litres of drinking water annually by recycling 75 to 80 per cent of its water usage. With innovative design features like sunshades, an abundant use of natural light and an under-floor displacement air conditioning system, it promises to cut power usage and cut down its carbon pollution.
And can I say having just had a wander through this building, it's a fantastic building. It's alive, it's open, it's a place where staff like to be and like to work. And also when you see the abundance of natural light through it, you've got to congratulate the architects and those who had the vision to place this great building at Bendigo's centre.
This remarkable building is worthy of the remarkable story of Bendigo Bank. If we wound back the clock 150 years, all that we'd see around us might be few clumps of makeshift tents for the miners who had rushed here to build their fortunes.
But inside one of those tents, a few locals might be talking enthusiastically, sharing a dream  -  that one day, but one day, here in Bendigo the miners might be able to live in cottages of their own.
This was the dream that inspired 150 people to throw in five pounds worth of capital each and establish the Bendigo Permanent Land and Building Society 150 years ago, in 1858.
Today, we call it the Bendigo Bank - or to use its full title, the Bendigo and Adelaide Bank, following the merger last November.
It was a remarkable beginning for an organisation that today is known around the entire nation and manages more than $43 billion in loans under management.
What is remarkable about Bendigo Bank today is not just how it has grown but what it stands for in the eyes of Australian customers.
From the top end to the southern tip, and from towns lapped by the Indian Ocean to the nation's east coast, Bendigo Bank stands for local community banking and local community spirit.
A bank that believes in local communities and invests in local communities. A bank that gives local communities a real say in how their banking service is run. A bank that helps Australians make the dream of owning their own home a reality. And a bank that also helps local businesses grow.
Some in local communities across Australia, when people see the name ‘Bendigo Bank' they don't think of Bendigo. They think Atherton or Innisfail; of Bundaberg or Bunbury or Mount Gambier or Mildura. They think of their own home town.
This is a remarkable achievement, a remarkable accomplishment given that the idea was born here. It helps explain why we're opening this building today and why Bendigo Bank now provides jobs to 1,000 people in this city and in this building.
Australians remember that when many banks were leaving local towns and suburbs, Bendigo Bank did, as the Premier noted before, exactly the opposite.
They swam against the tide, opening new community branches, supporting local communities and creating local jobs. And they've been rewarded for it.
Today, Bendigo's community banking model continues to grow, with 220 community banks now operating around Australia. Bendigo Bank now helps more than 1.3 million customers to achieve their financial goals.
It makes an important contribution to a competitive and innovative Australian banking sector. Bendigo's record of innovation goes well beyond the community banking sector for which it is most well known.
It being the first financial institution to introduce Visa debit and credit cards back in 1982. Being the first financial institution to introduce a mortgage offset account, introducing Australia's first Green Loans in 2002, forming its banking joint venture with the not-for-profit sector known as Community Sector Banking, in 2002 as well.
In addition, Bendigo Bank is a leader in social responsibility, with its charitable arm, the Community Enterprise Foundation, giving back to the community through many local charities and community projects.
Ladies and gentlemen 2008 has been a very tough year for the financial sector around the world. Indeed, it has been one of the toughest for the financial system of any of the 150 years that Bendigo Bank has been in business.
The global financial system came close to complete meltdown. We saw more than 30 major banks around the world collapse, or have to be bailed out.
Many institutions and many businesses got caught up in the global financial crisis through no fault of their own.
This crisis has made it necessary for governments around the world to step in  -  to stabilise institutions, to inject equity and to restore confidence.
Australia has not suffered the extremes seen in the markets of many of our closest friends and allies. But Australia has not been immune from the global financial crisis.
The Government has taken early and decisive action to do everything possible to protect the Australian economy, families and jobs from the full impact of the global financial crisis.
That's why the Government acted decisively in October to offer a guarantee for all of Australia's 15 million bank deposit accounts - unprecedented in the history of the Commonwealth. That is why we've also acted to provide a guarantee for banks, building societies and credit unions. Unprecedented again in the history of the Commonwealth.
It's why we injected $8 billion into residential-backed mortgage securities market. Unprecedented, again, in the history of the Commonwealth. All these measures necessary to stabilise the Australian financial system. And the global financial system is still not out of the woods yet.
The global financial crisis has of course become a global crisis in credit markets, stock markets and through that also, in property markets. The global financial crisis has become therefore a crisis for the real economy. And a global crisis in the real economy becomes a global crisis in employment.
And that is why the Government has begun, through the Economic Security Strategy, providing payments to families and to pensioners, carers and people with disabilities all around Australia  -  as part of a $10.4 billion package to stimulate the economy, to support jobs, and create through it 75,000 additional jobs.
That's why we've backed the new car plan for Australia, a $6.2 billion plan for the future. That's why we've also invested $300 million to support local activity and investment by local authorities across Australia through the recent meeting of the Council of Australian Local Governments.
And why we have in the week just passed, agreed on a package of $15.1 billion with the States and Territories to invest in hospitals, schools, education and social housing. Again with a capacity to generate a further 133,000 jobs across the nation.
Can I say to you, ladies and gentlemen, citizens of Bendigo that this for us must just be the beginning. This will be a very difficult year ahead. The Government stands ready to take what additional action is necessary to support Australia through this most difficult time. And the difficult times are with us.
Let us not forget that in dealing with the global financial and economic crisis, these are not simply statistics and numbers on some balance sheet.
It's the financial security of hard-working Australian families, of pensioners, of carers that is at stake. It's the livelihood of working Australians that is at stake. It is also the jobs of Australians that is at stake.
And these are the things that matter and therefore the task of Government is to whatever is possible to reduce the impact of the global financial crisis on Australian jobs. And we've been reminded of the difficulty of that task today with the announcement of Rio Tinto's job cuts.
I believe as a community, as a national community, we can steer our way through this crisis for the future. I believe as a community, if we all pull together and recognise that we in this boat together we will come through in a strong way. I also believe that this is what the Australian people expect of us.
You know the great thing about Australia is that when you are in a crisis our habit and our custom and our history is to stick together. And guess what, we're in a global financial crisis and the challenge for the period ahead is for us all to stick together.
Each and every person of this great gathering in Bendigo today is in this together. Business, unions, employers, employees, governments - Federal, State, Local all of us - community organisations. And if we unite through this crisis we will take Australia through this crisis and we'll emerge stronger for it.
Ladies and gentlemen congratulations to those responsible for this striking building design. Bligh Voller Nield Architecture and GrayPuksand, working with ESG Consultancy Connell Wagner.
One of Bendigo Bank's property team, Richard Hasseldine, comments on the short video about the building on the Bendigo Bank website that this building aims to send the message to the local community that “we're here for long term”.
I would have thought after 150 years you didn't actually need to say that.
Congratulations to the staff of Bendigo and Adelaide Bank and to Robert Johanson and his board. May Bendigo Bank continue to thrive and prosper and give life and energy to this great city for many years to come.
And having made those remarks, ladies and gentlemen, it is with great pleasure and great delight that I declare the Bendigo Centre open, finally and formally for business. 


The Hill is an elemental part of Sydney cricketing culture and The Hill is therefore an elemental part of Australian cricketing culture.
It's probably remembered most vividly by visiting fast bowlers who happened to be innocently recovering at third man as they experiences an initiation to frank, fearless, forthright but always fair commentary from the crowd here seated, on their latest achievements with the ball.
Renowned for delivering the most colourful of these initiation rites was of course, was Yabba.
Yabba's most memorable advice was saved for one of Australia's greatest adversaries on the cricketing field, England captain during the Bodyline series Douglas Jardine.
Noticing Jardine swishing away a fly, Yabba cautioned: “Leave our flies alone, Jardine. They're the only friends you've got out here”.
I'm please to hear that Yabba is appropriately immortalised in the new stand by a bronze statue in the front row. That's a good thing.
In 1985, the Hill was interred for the first time, physically but not necessary in spirit, as it was replaced by the Doug Walters Stand.
Douggie was a legend of my childhood; a bit of a hero of mine for all kids growing with a bit of an interest of cricket at the time.
I remember the first book on cricket I was ever given by my dear Mum, was a book on batting technique featuring the young Doug Walters, providing advice to up and coming cricketing aspirants on how to master the off-drive.
I remember the book well. I read it diligently. Almost as diligently as any political wannabe would read the Hansard records in those days.
But there was always this eternal chasm between aspiration and achievement when it came to cricket, at least in my case.
I remember reading Doug's chapters as he meticulously followed through the technique of the ball leaving the bowler's hand at one end and dispatching the ball comfortably to the long off boundary on the other.
Bat up early, wait for it, wait for it, front foot forward to the pitch of the ball, then allow the bat to descend in a perfect arc. And then watch the ball disappear swiftly to that boundary at long off.
That as they say was the theory. And for me it was never entirely executed, in the sense that there was always a problem in terms of what they would describe as eye-hand coordination in my case.
But I always managed to translate Douggie's advice into how to be the recipient of the perfect yorker on every occasion, almost every occasion.
I never made it past the Yandina C team in rural Queensland cricket. And that I think was a fair estimation of my skills at the time. But I digress.
It's appropriate that in this magnificent new stand that the bar will be named after Doug, recognising the contribution he also made off the field, as one of the game's great characters.
I am also advised that card tables are being installed as we speak. Another one of Douggie's great past times.
But the man we are here to recognise today is the great Victor Trumper.
Over several generations and across many continents, much has been written about this glorious game.
And over a century since his passing, well about a century since his passing, more words of regard have been devoted to this man than almost any other.
Wisden, the great cricketing authority, described him as a “genius”, “the best and the most brilliant” of his generation, and possessing “remarkable powers”.
For a game so dominated by stats and figures, Trumper is actually not done justice by his record, which alone does not place him too far apart from his peers.
His test career spanned 48 matches, resulting in 3,163 runs at an average of 39. At first class level, he amassed 42 centuries at just under 44.6 runs per innings.
On Trumper's first trip to England in 1902, the Australian side arrived at the Old Trafford Test leading the hard-fought series 1-nil.
Trumper and the team in 1902, bore with the hopes and aspirations of the newly founded Australian nation.
Batting at the top of the innings, Trumper achieved something never seen in cricket before - an even-time century, and notching three figures before lunch.
During this rain-drenched tour he scored 2,570 runs at an average of 48, including 11 centuries.
But he never scored more than 128 on the tour. Mind you, I wouldn't mind scoring 128 on any occasion. 28 on any occasion would have done me just fine.
It is written that Trumper would throw away his wicket on favourable pitches to give his less accomplished team mates a go.
One team mate, Vernon Ransford, said that had he been greedy, he - Trumper -would have scored 4,000 runs on the tour, not 2,500.
This did not mean that Trumper was any less of a competitor when the going got tough.
Jack Fingleton, the Australian opening batsman (and later Press Gallery legend) wrote of Trumper that he and I quote, “rose to heights on wet wickets where others tumbled to earth and to death”.
Such as his gutsy 74 out of a total of 122 on a dangerous Melbourne strip in 1904  -  the stuff of legend.
This was the Trumper style  -  and he remains a great exemplar of a time when cricket's work was measured more on how you contributed to the team's overall performance, rather than the individual statistics that could be read on paper.
It's the mark of the man's popularity that in his home state of NSW, the Registry of Births records a sharp rise in the number of boys called Victor in the early 1900s.
In 1900 there were 167 boys named Victor. A decade later, this figure had risen to 195  -  ranking the 35th most popular name. All of you wanted to know that.
Meanwhile, even in 2007, the name Kevin is only ranked at 132nd here in NSW, with only 73 recordings.
Mind you, I'm Kevin and I'm from Queensland. I doubt I'd be doing much better there either.
Trumper was also renowned for his generosity. He ran a prominent sports store, but never cared much for making a quid.
One yarn told again by Jack Fingleton, revolves around his most revered knock at this ground.
At his shop and running late for a Test at the SCG, Vic quickly grabbed a new bat off the rack and came down to the ground to strike an effortless 185 not out. The days of great amateurs.
On returning to the shop, Trumper was met by an adoring fan who asked if he could buy one of his used bats. Vic typically agreed, and amazingly offered the bat he'd just used.
When settling on a price he said to the excited boy: “well, it was a forty five shilling bat but now it is second hand. You can have it for a pound.”
That's a great story about Vic Trumper.
While the Trumper legend for later generations is grounded in that great black and white photograph of him launching that powerful Trumper drive  -  you know that photograph, it just sits in your mind and your memory  -  what is often overlooked is that Victor Trumper was more than just a great cricketer.
He was the truly great all rounder of his day.
He played representative rugby union and Australian Rules football on this ground.
And not content with being a part of just the one code, Trumper was a founder of the initial ‘breakaway' rugby code that we now know as the NRL. Trumper the revolutionary.
In fact, he also played the new code, rugby league, here at the SCG. And I'm sure he would be pleased to know that the game lives on just next door.
I suppose for Queenslanders like myself, Trumper could therefore be best described as a combination of Wally Lewis, John Eales, Michael Voss and Matthew Hayden.
This great stand built to honour this great legend of this great game  -  in his home town and his home ground  -  will add to the rich history of the game here in Sydney.
A ground that is an icon not just for Sydney, but for those of us who come from beyond this great city's shores. This is an icon for Australian cricket and throughout the world.
I'm told that shortly before Trumper's time, the man who would go on to become Australia's first Prime Minister, Sir Edmund Barton, once umpired a match between NSW and a touring England side on this very ground.
It is written that such was the enthusiasm of the crowd, for the game, not for the umpire  -  for he was a politician, at least an aspirant  -  that the match was abandoned for a day following several pitch invasions.
This Prime Minister will content himself not with umpiring games, not playing games, but simply humbly taking the advice of others who suggest to me who should be members of the Prime Minister's XI.
At this ground that has been central to our cricketing history and to our national identity, it is fitting that Trumper will long be remembered directly opposite a stand named after Monty Noble.
Monty was one of the first to back the young Victor Trumper's ability and called his team mate a genius without compare.
Victor Trumper was a great cricketer who inspired a young nation.
Victor Trumper was not just a great cricketer. Victor Trumper was a good man, and the good, as they often say, died young.
He died from Bright's disease at just 37 years of age, a tragedy.
As it has been now about a century, and through what we are here to mark today, I am certain the spirit of Victor Trumper will remain alive for many generations to come.
A celebration of Australian cricket. A celebration of cricket here in Sydney. A celebration and an honour to a great Australian.
It's an honour therefore as Prime Minister of Australia to officially open the Victor Trumper Stand.


Today the Australian Government announces one of the largest and most important structural reforms to our economy in a generation, the introduction of a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme.
Climate change is an inconvenient truth and a truth that we can no longer conveniently ignore.
No sustainable leadership can ignore an elephant in the room of this proportion.
To do so would be to threaten the future of our people, our nation, and our planet.
Today the Australian Government responds to the threat of global warming, longer droughts and more extreme weather by embracing a responsible plan of action on climate change.
Climate change is one of the greatest, enduring challenges that we face as a nation and as an international community.
Climate change is nothing less than a threat to our people, our nation and our planet.
It is a threat that, if left unaddressed, has the capacity to permanently to affect our way of life.
The incontestable truth of climate change is that a decision not to act is in fact an active decision  -  an active decision to place the next generation at grave risk.
Today, this generation - our generation - stands at the crossroads of history.
We are the first generation empowered with the fullest understanding of climate change.
And we are the first generation to experience the tangible effects of climate change on our planet.
So the question for our generation is simple.
Do we act on the knowledge that we have in our possession?
Or do we wait  -  leaving the effects of climate change to our children and our grandchildren by which time it may well be too late?
Do we reduce our pollution today so our children and grandchildren can experience the same beautiful and bountiful planet that we have inherited?
Or do we wait  -  knowing our grandchildren may never see the grandeur of the Great Barrier Reef, or experience the wonder of the wetlands at Kakadu.
Do we become more energy efficient today so that we can start down a path towards a sustainable low pollution economy?
Or do we wait  -  knowing our children and grandchildren will experience longer droughts, declining food production, rising sea levels and more extreme weather events.
I say we can wait no more.
The time has come for action.
And what I outline today is a program of responsible action.
Costs of inaction
Australians understand that climate change threatens our economic prosperity, our unique natural environment and our way of life.
As one of the hottest and driest continents on earth, Australia's environment and economy will be one of the hardest and fastest hit by climate change if we do not act now.
11 of the 12 hottest years in history have all occurred in the last 12 years.
Scientists predict that temperatures in Australia may rise by around 5 degrees by the end of the century.
And without action, rising temperatures will have dramatic effects on Australia.
     * Rising sea levels and storm surges will threaten those who live and work along our coasts;
     * We will face declining food production from our farms through longer, more frequent and harsher droughts; and
     * Many of our natural treasures and the tourism industry they support will be at risk.
We simply cannot afford to ignore climate change any longer.
The case for action is clear.
The cost of inaction is equally clear.
We need to take responsible action to reduce carbon pollution over time, to invest in the low pollution jobs of the future and to do so in concert with other economies around the world.
Just over one year ago, during the 2007 Federal election, I promised to end the 12 years of climate change denial under the previous Government.
To end the 12 years of climate change inaction under the previous government.
12 years of opportunities squandered, rather than opportunities seized.
I made the commitment that, if elected, I would make Australia part of the global climate change solution  -  not just part of the global climate change problem.
I undertook to ratify Kyoto, to underpin out commitments abroad.
The Government has honoured that commitment.
I undertook to release in our first year our blueprint for reducing carbon pollution at home.
Today, notwithstanding the economic challenges of the last 12 months, the Government honours that commitment.
The Government has been working hard all year to deliver on our commitment to tackle climate change, against a background of the worst financial crisis in three quarters of a century.
Five of the world's largest economies have already fallen into recession, including the US, Japan, Germany and France.
The OECD has predicted that we will see around eight million jobs lost across the advanced economies in the period ahead.
Australia is not immune from this crisis.
We're already beginning to see the impact on Australian growth and jobs.
We will need to deal with what will be a long and drawn out crisis.
That is why the Government has taken early and decisive action to support growth and reduce the impacts of the global financial crisis and global recession on Australian families and jobs.
Last Friday I announced a $4.7 billion nation building plan to strengthen the Australian economy and help create up to 32,000 Australian jobs.
This builds on four previous steps the Government has already taken:
     * the $10.4 billion economic security strategy to help create around 75,000 jobs;
     * the $6.2 billion long term plan to support our automotive industry and its 200,000 direct and indirect jobs;
     * the $300 million investment in regional and local government infrastructure to sustain local communities and protect local jobs; and
     * the $15.1 billion investment in education, health and housing reform delivered through the Council of Australian Governments, capable of creating an estimated 133,000 jobs.
Taken together, these measures are designed to provide economic stimulus capable of creating nearly a quarter of a million jobs over time.
The Australian Government will continue to take whatever further action is necessary in the months ahead.
But today's difficult circumstances should not be used as an excuse to ignore the threat climate change poses to Australia's long term economic prosperity.
Instead, investing in the clean energy jobs and industries of the future must be part of our response to the global financial crisis.
The work of the Treasury and Professor Ross Garnaut demonstrates that the longer we wait to take action on climate change, the more it will cost.
Furthermore, the Treasury has advised that taking responsible action on climate change will, at most, cost the economy one tenth of one percent of GDP growth measured against no policy change.
In designing the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, we have been mindful of the challenges facing the Australian economy today.
Our primary objective has been to get the balance right.
To set in place a scheme that reduces carbon pollution and supports economic growth.
This means supporting Australian jobs and assisting households today, while moving to the low pollution economy that will help create the jobs of the future.
Hundreds of thousands of jobs will be created over time as Australia makes the transition to a low pollution economy.
Treasury modelling estimates that taking responsible action on climate change will see the renewable energy sector alone grow to 30 times its current size by 2050, creating thousands of new jobs.
If Australia is to be a leader in the new clean energy industries, we need to build a low pollution, clean energy economy.
If we accept the premise that we will all be living in a carbon constrained world in the future, it follows that the economically responsible course of action is to prepare for that constraint today.
If we begin to act now, the transformation can be engineered at a manageable pace.
If we continue to put it off, the transformation will be abrupt and the dislocation acute.
Acting now will enable us to develop the skills base, trial the new technologies, and refine the business models that will help Australia become a leader in the low pollution industries of the future.
Acting now also helps us shape the global outcome on climate change action that Australia needs.
To delay any longer - would be reckless and irresponsible for our economy and for our environment .
The truth is that 12 years of inaction under the Liberals makes our transition to a low pollution economy more difficult today.
Today, Malcolm Turnbull and the Liberal Party are still divided and still debating whether climate change even exists.
Malcolm Turnbull and the Liberals are now looking for excuses not to act again.
Australia is today the biggest carbon polluter in the developed world on a per capita basis.
This is the country the Liberals left us.
This is a record of which we should not be proud.
Yet we are the developed country with the most to lose from climate change.
This has been a triumph of the worst kind of short termism Australia has ever seen.
On climate change, we are not ahead of the curve.
We have been behind the curve.
How could it be that we pioneered breakthrough solar technology in Australia and the previous government sat idly by while we lost that technology to China.
That company, Suntech, is now one of the world's largest solar cell makers and employs 3,500 people.
The Government will do everything we reasonably can to deliver business certainty; to ensure as smooth a transition as possible to a low pollution future, and to boost the renewable energy sector in the future.
We will do this because we know this is the economically responsible course of action.
We will be attacked from the far right for taking any action at all.
We will be attacked from parts of the far left for not going far enough by refusing to close down Australia's coal industry.
The Government believes we have got the balance right.
The White Paper released today is the culmination of a robust and intensive process underpinned by the extensive Treasury Modelling exercise; the Garnaut review and the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme Green Paper.
Over the past year we have put a strong focus on assessing the scientific evidence, conducting the economic modelling and consulting widely with businesses, expert groups and the wider community.
The plan we advance in this White Paper represents an evolution of the proposals in the Green Paper  -  retaining the overall design, while refining a number of key features - as a result of our extensive consultation.
The Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme to start in 2010 will reform the way our economy works:
     * by, for the first time, putting a cost on carbon pollution which will encourage major carbon polluting businesses to lower their emissions;
     * by using the funds raised by the scheme to help industries that pollute, to lower their emissions, transition to a low pollution future and to secure jobs in these industries;
     * by using the funds raised to assist households to adjust to the scheme, making sure Australian families are not asked to carry the full cost burden of climate change; and
     * by creating a market incentive that builds on the Government's direct investment in clean energy technologies to expand solar energy, wind farms, geothermal, and other renewables and new technologies like carbon capture and storage.
For the first time in history, we will begin to include the cost of carbon pollution in the price of goods and services.
By making the cost of carbon pollution visible, we will begin to redress what Sir Nicholas Stern rightly described in 2006 as the greatest market failure in history.
And the time has come for Australia to embrace this future.
The Government was elected with a long-term commitment to reducing Australia's carbon pollution by 60 per cent from 2000 levels by 2050.
The Government reaffirms that commitment.
Today I announce the Government's medium-term target range: in other words, our 2020 target to reduce carbon pollution.
These targets are appropriate and responsible.
They deliver necessary reform to tackle the long term challenge of climate change, while supporting our economy and securing jobs during this global recession.
By the end of 2020, we will reduce Australia's carbon pollution by between 5 per cent and 15 per cent below 2000 levels.
5 per cent below 2000 levels is our minimum, unconditional commitment to reduce emissions by 2020, irrespective of the actions of other nations.
15 per cent below 2000 levels is our commitment to reduce emissions further, if there is a global agreement where all major economies commit to substantially restrain emissions and advanced economies take on comparable reductions to that of Australia.
This is a substantial commitment and will require us to turn around current trends which, if there is no policy change, have Australian emissions growing by around 20 percent between 2000 and 2020.
To maximise certainty, today we have announced the rate of reduction in Australia's emissions for the first three years from 2010 to 2013.
By introducing the scheme in 2010 Australia will start reducing our contribution to carbon pollution the very next year, 2011.
To further increase business certainty, at all times, we will provide clear scheme caps for the following five years.
For up to a further ten years we will provide a range for emissions reductions to provide guidance on the path of future scheme caps.
Treasury modelling demonstrates that we can deliver on this 5-15 per cent commitment while maintaining solid economic growth.
By starting work towards this target range now, we will ensure the carbon price is introduced gradually  -  giving the economy time to adjust - rather than with a sharp shock further down the track.
Australia's medium term targets for reducing carbon pollution compare favourably with those of other nations that have announced targets, such as the European Union.
The EU's 20 per cent target announced over the weekend is equal to a 24 per cent reduction in emissions for each European from 1990 to 2020.
Our 5 per cent unconditional target is equal to a 27 per cent reduction in carbon pollution for each Australian from 2000 to 2020  -  and a 34 percent reduction for each Australian from 1990.
That is because Europe's population is not projected to grow between 1990 and 2020.
By contrast Australia's population is projected to growth by 45 per cent over the same period.
In fact if the Europeans were to adopt the same per capita effort as Australia is proposing, their economy wide cuts would be around 30 per cent by 2020.
Second, it should be emphasised that not every European country will each reduce their emissions by the 20 per cent that Brussels has recently announced. Depending on their circumstances  -  taking into account population growth and resource base - different European countries will make different contributions. Some will make less than 20 percent; some more.
Third, it should be noted that at this stage the incoming US administration is committed to a mid-term target of 0 per cent growth against 1990 levels by 2020  -  albeit with an ambitious 2050 target of 80 per cent.
Fourth, demonstrating that we can make real cuts to Australia's carbon pollution while continuing to grow our economy will encourage other countries to join the global fight and see that reducing emissions is consistent with solid economic growth. 
The Government also confirms today that it accepts the findings of the Garnaut Climate Change Review that it is in Australia's interests to pursue a fair and effective global agreement delivering deep cuts in emissions, so as to stabilise concentrations of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere at around 450 parts per million or lower by mid century.
However, we also realise that achieving global commitment to such action in the near term will be challenging.
The Government is therefore pursuing responsible action now, to help move the economy to a low pollution future and position Australia to be part of a comprehensive 450ppm agreement in the future if that proves possible.
Of course, as part of our efforts to help shape a global solution, Australia stands ready to adjust our post-2020 targets to play our full part in achieving a 450ppm agreement.
This includes reconsidering our 2050 target, should it become necessary to play our part alongside commitments from both developed and developing countries.
Should that become necessary, as part of a truly ambitious global agreement around 450 ppm, the Government would of course seek an explicit mandate at the next election in support of a 2050 target beyond a 60 per cent reduction.
At present, such an ambitious outcome is an extremely difficult prospect.
But if all major economies were to move as one towards a truly ambitious target, Australia's comparative advantage would not be disadvantaged.
Australia's targets for 2020 however will lie between 5 and 15 per cent.
We are not going to make promises that cannot be delivered.
We are starting the scheme with appropriate and responsible targets  -  targets that are broadly consistent with those of other developed nations.
In the circumstances we currently confront, this is a responsible course of action.
The government will use every cent raised by the sale of pollution permits to transition to a low pollution economy and help households and business adjust to the Scheme.
The reality is, that there is no cost-free way to transition to the low pollution economy of the future.
We are being completely honest and upfront about that.
While big businesses will need permits for their carbon pollution, households will ultimately face increases to the price of electricity, gas, petrol and other goods and services as the cost of those permits is passed on.
With a starting carbon price of $25, the impact on most households will be modest  -  resulting in an average increase in spending of $4 a week on electricity, $2 a week on gas and other fuels, and an estimated overall increase in the cost of living of 1.1 per cent in 2010-11.
The Government nonetheless recognises that many Australians are already doing it tough.
The White Paper sets out a comprehensive new package of financial assistance for Australian households worth around $6 billion a year to be funded from the sale of carbon pollution permits. This assistance will be available from the commencement of the Scheme in 2010.
Our household assistance package contains 5 core undertakings:
     * Pensioners, seniors and carers will receive additional support, above indexation, to fully meet the expected overall cost of living flowing from the scheme.
     * Other low-income households will receive additional support, above indexation, to fully meet the expected overall increase in the cost of living flowing from the scheme.
     * Around 90 per cent of low-income households (or 2.9 million households) will receive assistance equal to 120 per cent or more of their cost of living increase.
     * Middle-income households will receive additional support, above indexation, to help meet the expected overall increase in the cost of living flowing from the scheme. Around 97 per cent of middle income households will receive some direct cash assistance. For middle-income families receiving Family Tax Benefit Part A, the Government will provide assistance to meet at least half of these costs.
     * Motorists will be protected from higher fuel costs flowing from the scheme, by ‘cent-for-cent' reductions in fuel tax for the first three years.
     * The Australian Government is also providing substantial assistance to secure Australian jobs as we transition our industries to the low pollution economy of the future.
In determining the level of assistance to be provided to business and industry, the Government has been very mindful of the present day challenges facing Australian firms.
With this in mind, we have listened closely to the concerns of the business community and made a number of significant improvements to the Scheme as a result of their feedback.
The package of assistance to emissions-intensive trade-exposed firms that we have set out today has been designed to support Australian jobs, today and into the future.
For industries that produce significant amounts of carbon pollution and who face international competition, introducing a carbon price in Australia in the absence of appropriate adjustment mechanisms could lead to carbon leakage  -  that is, an activity could be displaced from Australia, only to reappear elsewhere with a higher carbon footprint.
To manage the risk of carbon leakage, support jobs and ease the transition to a low pollution future, the level of assistance to be provided to firms performing emissions intensive activities has been significantly increased from the proposal outlined in the Green Paper.
These changes mean that a number of important Australian industries that would not have received assistance under the Green Paper model will receive significant assistance.
When the Scheme commences, all firms that qualify for assistance will receive free permits to cover at least 60 per cent of average emissions in their industry.
Based on the changes that we have made it is likely that both LNG production and petrol refining will receive assistance at the 60 per cent rate. These industries would have missed out on assistance under the Green Paper model.
The most emissions-intensive activities like aluminium smelting and integrated iron and steel production will receive free permits at a rate of 90 per cent.
Our package of assistance for emissions intensive trade exposed industries will support growth, jobs and new investment in these industries.
The total level of assistance to emissions-intensive trade-exposed industries at the commencement of the Scheme has increased to around 25 per cent of total carbon pollution permits  -  or 35 per cent if agriculture is included  -  rising to around 45 per cent by 2020 if agriculture is included in the scheme after 2015.
In contrast, in the Green Paper it was proposed that assistance to these industries would commence at around 20 per cent of the total permit pool  -  or 30 per cent if agriculture were included  -  and remain constant around this level going forward.
This comprehensive assistance package for emissions-intensive trade-exposed industries is designed to keep these industries strong in the absence of a carbon price being in place in competitor countries.
At the same time, it is also designed to ease the transition of this sector to the low pollution economy of the future  -  increasing carbon productivity over time and thus global competitiveness into the future as the rest of the world moves to cut emissions.
Importantly, those receiving assistance will still face a strong financial incentive to reduce emissions, as they will be able to sell the permits if they are able to reduce their emissions by investing in new cost effective production methods, cleaner technologies or energy efficiency.
Today, I announce that the Climate Change Action Fund will be allocated $2.15 billion over five years. The Fund will smooth the transition to a low pollution economy for businesses (not allocated to free permits) community sector organisations, workers, regions and communities. 
The Fund will have four streams.
The first stream will provide information to businesses and community service organisations about the scheme, and about how to become more energy efficient.
The second stream will support investment in energy efficiency and low emissions technologies in businesses  -  particularly small businesses  -  and community organisations. This stream help will fund capital investments, such as lighting and air conditioning upgrades, or other energy-saving equipment.
The third stream makes a provision for structural adjustment assistance in the event that workers and communities face unanticipated challenges.
The fourth stream will promote reductions in carbon pollution in the coal mining sector, while assisting the sector to adjust to the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme over time.
Australia enjoys high levels of energy security underpinned by a solid regulatory environment. A key priority for our Government in designing the Scheme has been to maintain these high standards and foster a positive investment environment for the electricity sector into the future.
As part of this, I can announce the Government will provide assistance to the most emissions intensive coal-fired electricity generators through the Electricity Sector Adjustment Scheme.
This assistance will be delivered through a fixed allocation of free permits - worth approximately $3.9 billion - to be provided over five years. A review will take place after three years to ensure the windfall gains made by power generators under the European Union scheme are not revisited here in Australia.
Australia's three energy market bodies were asked by the Government to consider the broader Scheme design and the ESAS package. All three concluded that risks to energy security had been significantly mitigated.
The Australian Energy Regulator (AER) noted that the risk of Scheme-related plant shutdowns are low.
The Electricity Sector Adjustment Scheme will play a key role in supporting a positive investment environment for the electricity sector and in-turn, a secure overall investment environment for Australia.
Given the scale of investment we will see in our energy sector as we move to the low pollution economy of the future, a secure investment environment in the electricity sector is critical.
Moving to a low pollution economy will require significant investment in new electricity generation from renewable sources like solar, wind and geo-thermal energy. It will also require us to find a low pollution way to continue using coal by making Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS) work.
The Electricity Sector Adjustment Scheme represents a necessary and important contribution to support this essential new investment in Australia's electricity generation sector.
The Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme will deliver a market incentive to build on our investments in renewable energy, carbon capture and storage and low emission technologies.
We recognise that the scale of the economic transformation required is so large, the barriers to change are so high, and the imperative to change so pressing, that additional measures are required to enhance the market incentive provided by the Scheme.
We are taking substantial action to accelerate the large-scale development, demonstration and deployment of new, clean energy technologies.
The Government is driving this transformation through measures such as the Renewable Energy Target, which will require 20 per cent of Australia's electricity to be generated from renewable sources  -  like solar, wind and geo-thermal - by 2020.
This is further supported by the Government's $500 million Renewable Energy Fund, to support the development and commercialisation of advanced renewable energy technologies in Australia.
Yesterday I announced that we would make the full $500 million available over the next 18 months to accelerate the demonstration and commericalisation of new renewable energy technologies.
To secure Australia's position as a major energy exporter, our carbon productivitiy must improve significantly.
Carbon capture and storage technologies will play a crucial role in this transformation.
The Government has already made a range of substantial commitments to the development and deployment of this important new technology. These commitments include:
     * the establishment of the Global Carbon Capture and Storage Initiative
     * funding of up to $100 million a year towards a new Global CCS Institute
     * the provision of $500 million over eight years through the National Low Emissions Coal Fund, and
     * the development of a new legal framework for carbon capture and storage through the Offshore Petroleum Amendment (Greenhouse Gas Storage) Act, which Parliament passed earlier this year.
Both renewable energy and CCS are likely to be deployed in regional areas. By supporting these technologies, the Government will further secure low pollution jobs in Australia's regions.
We are also assisting industry to respond to climate change, with the $500 million Green Car Innovation Fund and the $240 million Clean Business Australia Fund.
We know some groups will say we are not doing enough.
Other groups will say we are doing too much, too soon.
That is why we have worked hard to get the balance right.
The Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme is the best way to achieve a low pollution economy for the future cost effectively, and across our whole economy.
The most important decisions a government makes are never the easiest.
Establishing the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme won't necessarily be easy or popular.
The easiest thing to do in response to the global financial crisis is to do nothing.
Instead the right course of action is to set robust and responsible targets, establish a real price for carbon and to begin the long term process of transformation.
Without action on climate change, Australia faces a future of parched farms, bleached reefs and empty reservoirs.
And we risk being left behind as other nations invest in the clean energy jobs and industries of the future.
Recently a bloke named Jason from Ballina in northern NSW wrote to tell me seven practical steps he is taking to reduce his greenhouse pollution - like using the cold water cycle on his washing machine, and turning off his computer at night.
A few months ago a school girl at our community cabinet meeting in the southern suburbs of Adelaide asked me pointedly, if I'm Prime Minister, why can't I get all the office blocks to turn their lights off at night?
A 61 year old grandmother from O'Connell in the NSW Central Tablelands wrote to tell me that she's never voted Labor before, but she feels that more than ever in our nation's history now is the time when Australia needs strong leadership, because of the impact on climate change for our kids' future.
One after another, in their own way, Australians are saying they are willing to do their bit, but the Government must provide leadership.
Today's White Paper on climate change is about responsible leadership in the context of a global financial crisis.
Australia faces a choice.
We can either wait and allow the challenges to get worse, or we can take action now.
No longer can Australia's government ignore this crisis.
No longer can Australia's businesses miss this opportunity.
Today, the Australian Government has chosen to take the reasonable and responsible action that will set Australia on the path towards a more secure and more prosperous low pollution future.
I am pleased to formally launch the White Paper on the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme: Australia's Low Pollution Future.
The White Paper Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme: Australia's Low Pollution Future is available on the Department of Climate Change website.
The Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme and You at the Treasury website.


Today I announced one of the largest and most important structural reforms to our economy in a generation, the introduction of a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme.
Climate change is one of the greatest, enduring challenges that we face as a nation and as an international community.
Climate change is nothing less than a threat to our people, our nation and our planet.
We are the first generation to experience the tangible effects of climate change on our planet.
The case for action is clear.
The cost of inaction is equally clear. Our announcement today sets out our medium-term target range: in other words, our 2020 target to reduce carbon pollution.
These targets are appropriate and responsible.
They strike the right balance between tackling climate change and supporting our economy and jobs during this global recession.
Our scheme will start in 2010.
We will put a cost and a charge on carbon pollution which will encourage major polluting businesses to lower their emissions. The funds generated from this charge will be used to help industries that pollute, lower their future emissions.
We will also use the funds raised to invest in the green-collar jobs of the future  -  in solar energy, on wind farms and in jobs using new technologies like clean coal and geo-thermal energy.
Key to the success of the strategy will be our plans to assist households adjust to the scheme  -  Australian families won't carry the full cost of climate change.
Over the next couple of days and weeks you will hear lots of different opinions.
I encourage you to read the Climate Change White Paper  -  or at the very least read “The Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme and You”, you will find a link here on this website.
I think you will agree we have achieved the right balance. Of course people are going to have different views and we will get attacked from the left and from the right for either not doing enough or for doing too much. That's why its important to get the balance right. Get the balance right for the environment, get the balance right for the economy and jobs.
I wish you and your family a very safe and happy Christmas and all the best for 2009.
A video of this speech is available. 
The White Paper Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme: Australia's Low Pollution Future is available on the Department of Climate Change website.
The Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme and You is available on the Treasury website.


Well you know something? I've been Prime Minister for a year now and I've learnt one thing. And that is, you blokes who look really ugly with beards belong to the Special Forces.
[Laughter]
And blokes without beards don't.
It's good to see this operation again as I was here this time last year.
You know, that was a very impressive display of fire power and an impressive display of what you do when you harness the kinetic force of this operation again an enemy.
I know enough about what you've been doing the last 12 months to know that that is not just for show for visits by the Chief of the Defence Force and myself today but that is what you actually deploy in the field.
And this is an ugly operating environment. It doesn't look a bit like the Gold Coast to me. And can I say, each time you've lost one of yours we go through it, and we have a report from the Chief of the Defence Force about what happened and about who you're up against and how ugly it was.
And what I want you to know, as your Prime Minister, is that each of us who sit around a table and listen to that take it very personally.
So when you're out there in this God-forsaken part of the world, doing your stuff, you need to know that back home, not just the nation's behind you, the people running the show like the Defence Force Chief are behind you and the Government is behind you as well.
What I admire about what you blokes do is that it is full of skill. What you just displayed [inaudible].
I know enough about what you deploy and what you do but skill is one thing [inaudible].
[Aircraft noise obscures audio]
...and again, saying goodbye to one of your own. I've been there too often. Look after yourselves, be careful, do your job.
And I haven't brought it out with me but what I've brought from Australia is, is, is  -  I was going to bring a crate load of beer but that wasn't allowed.
[Laughter]
I was going to bring a smaller crate load of something harder than that and that wasn't allowed either.
But the Test Series is coming up so for the Boxing Day Test between you blokes and the reconstruction fellas down the hill, there is a brand new cricket kit for each of you. Bats, balls, wicket keeper's gloves, pads, and - given that I understand that some people here are of a serious standard - protectors as well. So it is all there.
When I was out at Holsworthy the other day, I ran into two ladies who asked me to plant a kiss on the cheeks of Sergeant [inaudible].
[Tape ends]


***TRANSCRIPT INCOMPLETE DUE TO POOR AUDIO QUALITY***
(Inaudible)
...we weren't quite sure whether it was going to happen or not. But with a bit of perseverance and some help from our Dutch friends and allies, we're all here and we're all here in one piece.
More importantly we're here to actually have a yak with each one of you. The purpose of being here is very simple, very, very simple. And that is to you, the men and women of the Australian defence force, for me as Prime Minister of Australia to say thank you. Thank you, thank you, for what you're doing.
Now the country looks to what you do with pride and admiration. You know sometimes if you're stuck up here, you must think you're a long way from everybody and everyone's forgotten. Well I'm also here to say to you  -  we haven't forgotten.
We know what's going on here. We follow, as a Government, day by day, week by week in terms of what you're up to. And we've had that experience, that you've all had, which is saying goodbye to some of your mates.
And that's been tough. It's tough for you because they have been your mates. But you know something? It's been tough for their families - it's also been tough for the nation.
Australia feels it when we lose one of our men and women in uniform. They feel it, they feel it in their gut. They feel it in their heart.
I've been to too many funerals. I don't like going. But you know something? When we say goodbye to one of our own, the nation is united in a common purpose.
That is not just to honour what they've done but on top of it, to reaffirm to every person back home in Australia what they have done and what you are doing is important.
You know flying over this country coming here, you scratch your head a bit and say how is it for hundreds of years people have fought over this place? You scratch your head, don't you?
And it has been handed to the good people of Afghanistan; over the last several decades one wave of difficulty after another. Our job is to give them a fair shake. To give them a fair chance, to give them peace and opportunity.
You know when I speak to the Afghan community in Australia, and there is many of them, they, to a person, appreciate what we are doing here. (inaudible)
And here in this vast country, which has known such a bloody history, giving these people in Afghanistan a decent shake at their future. That is really important stuff. Cos' they haven't had much. It's been pretty bad.
The fact that in a year ahead, they can go to the ballot box and elect their own people to run their own country, that is an advance of centuries compared to where this place has been.
The fact that young girls in this country, rather than being denied any form of educational opportunity as declared under the Taliban, can now go to school. And have a decent chance in life. And be shown that there are pathways to their own personal future.
Men and women of the ADF are out there building bridges, building infrastructure, connecting one part of the country with, to another  -  that is progress.
The fact that you're out there, pushing the enemy back - step by step, mountain ridge by mountain ridge  -  that is progress. The fact that you're here also training, raising a force in partnership with our friends and allies  -  that is progress.
Have we got anywhere? Remind them of each one of those core facts. And remind them of what this place was like, this place, let's never forget that as well.
Our ally, the United States was attacked by a terrorist organisation Al Qaeda, which had as its training base, this country run by the Taliban. And we are a loyal ally of the United States said ‘well, bugger that for a joke  -  we're in'. And we still are. And that is as it should be; standing up for your allies, invoking the formal obligation of the alliance with the United States.
And by denying the enemy the opportunity to use this country as a training base, as it was unfettered for Al Qaeda in the past, that also is progress.
Their ability as a terrorist organisation to reach out and wreak havoc and hell across the world, as they've done in the past, we've got a job as a community of civilised nations to deny them that opportunity. And that is what you are doing.
Christmas is coming and for those of you who are here and separated from your wives, your husbands, your partners, your girlfriends, your boyfriends, you mums, your dads, kids and grandparents and those who love you in the communities from which you come - I bring a message on behalf of each of them as well. And I've met a few of them in recent days. That is, they are proud of each and every one of you. Proud of what you're doing for Australia. Proud of what you're doing in this country.
It doesn't make it any easier to be apart from them at this time of year. I'm going to go home and spend Christmas with my wife and three kids and you're not. And I understand that that's hard.
But you know, at this time of year in particular, as the families of the nation settle down around a Christmas tree and share presents, the nation will be thinking of you as well.
But I've been thinking of you as well: exhibit A. I was told I could not bring you several cartons of beer.
[Laughter]
I was told I couldn't bring you several crates of beer. In fact I was told I couldn't bring you any beer at all. So, we left that to one side.
But there is a Test series coming up between ourselves and South Africa. And so we thought that the best way to provide some R and R and some encouragement for the Australian Test team was for you to, on camera, to show how it's done.
So here is a brand new, all bits and pieces attached, cricket set for this great group of men and women. Oh and girls, I expect you to be out in the field as well.
There is a further task, which is that by the end of your tour of duty, I expect you to have introduced the Dutch to the finer points of the game. It is part of our ongoing friendship and partnership with them.
But this is for you and it's my idea, so if you think it stinks you can blame me and not the CDF. Okay?
[Laughter]
But it is part of us giving you a bit of a Christmas present.
Today because it was a bit of a hassle getting here, and you may have heard some of the detail of what that involved, our time has been cut a little bit shorter than it would.
But I've got one interest in being here apart from saying thank you and that is to shake each of your hands and to have a yak about what is going on and about any extra stuff that you might need.
So to conclude, on behalf of a grateful nation, thanks for what you're doing. Have a really happy Christmas and keep safe. That's what the country wants  -  keep safe.


New year is a time for us to reflect on the year that's just past and of course, to look to the year that lies ahead. 
2008 saw some outstanding and memorable achievements around the world, including in the Beijing Olympics in August, the Paralympics in September and at the year's end, the historic election of an African-American as President of the United States.
At home, Australians came together as we made the historic apology to the Stolen Generations and pledged to work together to close the gap on indigenous disadvantage.
We hosted around 150,000 young people from around the world for the remarkable World Youth Day celebrations in July. And this year we showed again the great strength of Australia's democracy with the smooth transition to a new Federal Government.
But for much of the year our news was dominated by the worsening global financial crisis, the likes of which have not been seen in almost 80 years.
This has created a lot of uncertainty throughout our community as people worry about their jobs, their businesses and their retirement savings. As the global financial crisis has unfolded the Government has taken early and decisive action to do everything possible to stabilise our financial markets and to stabilise the Australian economy, families and jobs from the full impact of the crisis.
As we enter 2009, we know it will be a very tough year for the global economy. And it will be a tough year for Australia as well.
What is important is that we remember we are all in this together.
The Government is determined to do all we can to support Australian families and the jobs and businesses of Australians. And if we stick together, businesses, unions, employers, employees, governments at different levels, federal, state and local and the whole community, we can and will see Australia through.
Australia is a great nation and so often the hardest times bring out the best in us.
We're a tough people, we're a resilient people and in hard times we also care for each other and for other members of the community.
Let us each have a restful break this holiday season and let us enter 2009 with optimism and with renewed energy.
In this spirit I extend to all Australians, country and city, big towns, small towns, our biggest cities to the distant outback my best wishes for a happy, healthy and fulfilling new year.
[Ends] 


Trooper Mark Donaldson VC. Your beautiful wife Emma. And your wonderful, wonderful child. And distinguished Australians one and all.
Today Trooper Mark Donaldson joins the ranks of Australian heroes. And his feat of arms, his feat under fire, now becomes the stuff of Australian legend.
Today Trooper Donaldson joins the ranks of Jacka, of Cutler, of Kingsbury, of so many who have earned this medal of gallantry. Of Simpson, of Payne, and others who have been honoured over the years.
He joins the ranks of our bravest and our finest. In the 153-year history of the Victoria Cross, fewer than 100 Australians have been awarded this highest military honour. And now Trooper Donaldson is one of them.
Trooper Donaldson is the first Australian to receive this award in 40 years. Trooper Donaldson is the first in history to be awarded the Victoria Cross for Australia in the national form of this historic award that was established nearly 20 years ago.
This award is not given lightly, this award has never been given lightly. The scroll on the Victoria Cross is inscribed with two simply words, but two most powerful words. Those words are “for valour”.
It is awarded in recognition of exceptional bravery, of extraordinary courage in the face of the enemy.
What is courage? How is courage measured?
The answer perhaps lies best with those who have known the profession of arms.
General Sherman of the Union Army wrote as follows: “Courage is the perfect sensibility of the measure of danger and the mental willingness to endure it.”
And I read Trooper Donaldson's citation from the Defence Force, and I read it, and I read it again. Because this was courage writ large. It leapt from the page. Bear with me while I read part of it to you again.
“During the conduct of a fighting patrol, Trooper Donaldson was travelling in a combined Afghan, US and Australian vehicle convoy that was engaged by a numerically superior, entrenched and coordinated enemy ambush. The ambush was initiated by a high volume of sustained machine gun fire, coupled with the effective use of rocket propelled grenades. Such was the effect of the initiation that the combined patrol suffered numerous casualties, completely lost the initiative and became immediately suppressed. It was over two hours before the convoy was able to establish a clean break and move to an area free of any fire.
“In the early stages of the ambush, Trooper Donaldson reacted spontaneously to regain the initiative. He moved rapidly between alternate positions of cover engaging the enemy with 56 millimetre and 84 millimetre anti-armour weapons, as well as his M4 rifle. During an early stage of the enemy ambush, he deliberately exposed himself to enemy fire in order to draw attention to himself and thus away from wounded soldiers. This selfless act alone brought enough time for those wounded to be moved to relative safety.”
And in reference to the saving of the interpreter: “His movement, once identified by the enemy, drew intense and accurate machine gun fire from entrenched positions. Upon reaching the wounded coalition force interpreter, Trooper Donaldson picked up and carried him back to the relative safety of the vehicles and then provided immediate first aid before returning to the fight.
“In subsequent occasions during the battle, Trooper Donaldson administered medical care to other wounded soldiers whilst continuing to engage the enemy.”
In our workaday lives, that is the stuff of legend. It is the stuff of Australian legend.
It is the spirit of Kokoda where nobody is left behind.
It is the spirit of ANZAC, as the great CEW Bean has written: “ANZAC stood, and still stands, for reckless valour in a good cause, for enterprise, for resourcefulness, fidelity, comradeship, and endurance that will never own defeat.”
Mark, these men of ANZAC would nod with a knowing pride of your achievements and your feats in the field of battle in Afghanistan.
Within this last week, we have buried one of our best who lost his life in his country's name. And he is one of too many who have done the same, fighting for the values for which Australia stands in the distant mountains of Afghanistan. Many others still have been wounded and I am fearful that there will be more.
As a nation we are proud of all of our men and women in uniform. For there is no higher honour than to wear the uniform of Australia.
Trooper Donaldson, by your deeds you honour your family. By your deeds you honour the Army. By your deeds you honour the country. This country Australia.
At a time of national difficulty, you also speak to the nation's spirit in a way you may not yet understand.
CS Lewis wrote: “Courage is not simply one of the virtues but the form of every virtue at the testing point.”
Trooper Donaldson, you met the test and you passed with flying colours.
Trooper Donaldson, the nation salutes you. A man of valour. A man who consciously took the decision to place his own life in peril to save the lives of others.
I salute you.


It is with great honour today that we commend the valour of Trooper Mark Donaldson with the presentation of the first Victoria Cross for Australia.
This is a truly historic day.
Trooper Donaldson's bravery will forever be engraved in Australian history.
Generations of school children will now know of the story of Trooper Mark Donaldson.
It is a story all Australians should know.
It is a story of a hero  -  one which will be told in classrooms, workplaces and watering holes for many years to come.
Trooper Donaldson's courage and selflessness in the face of such unspeakable danger is not only a great tribute to him and his family  -  it epitomises the spirit of the Aussie digger.
The soldiers that he saved will be forever indebted to him.
The nation will be forever indebted to him.
It is 40 years since a Victoria Cross was presented to an Australian. The last Victoria Cross (Imperial) was awarded on 24 May 1969, to Warrant Officer Keith Payne VC OAM for gallantry during the Vietnam War.
In 1991 the Victoria Cross for Australia replaced the Imperial Victoria Cross.


Premier Rees and distinguished guests.
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose lands we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
It is always good to speak at Australia Day events, because it gives me a chance to talk about our country.
Where we are heading.
What challenges are before us.
And what steps we are taking, as a nation, to meet them.
It is particularly good because Australia Day comes at such a great time of the year.
Over the summer, most of us have had a chance to rest, to spend time with family and friends, to enjoy the bush, the beach or the backyard, and to recharge our batteries ahead of the New Year.
Australia Day is a day in which  -  through our honours system and the Australian of the Year Awards  -  we recognise and thank Australians who inspire us  -  in the local community, in education, health, business, sport, the arts, and in so many fields.
Through their example, we see the best of what we can be as a nation and as a people.
But this year the nation is overshadowed by uncertainty and anxiety over the global financial crisis at our door.
I understand that worry, and I can tell you that 2009 is going to be a tough year.
The current economic turmoil is unlike any we have seen in our lifetime  -  and unlike any since the Great Depression of 1931.
It is not a crisis of Australia's making, but it will hurt Australia, as it is hurting every other country.
Over the next week, starting today, I plan to deliver a series of addresses on the global economic situation, how it will affect Australia and our framework for responding.
I am doing this because I intend to be absolutely straight with Australians about the impact of the crisis, and what we intend to do about it.
The impact will be big.
But so will our response.
In fact, it's been substantial so far, including $36 billion of new measures.
We are determined to chart a course that will see Australia through this crisis.
We are determined to navigate that course and to craft a more resilient Australia as a result.
We will do so with a combination of steely economic management and compassion for those who need support.
And we intend to prevail through the energy, innate optimism and decency of the Australian people.
The magnitude of the global financial crisis almost beggars belief.
By next year, up to 25 million people around the world may have lost their jobs, according to the OECD.
In the United States, the origin and epicentre of the earthquake, nearly three million jobs were lost last year  -  the largest decline since World War Two.
In December alone more than half a million people lost their jobs.
Global share markets have lost half their value since they peaked in October 2007  -  the greatest fall since the Great Depression.
That is $32 trillion  -  the equivalent of the total annual GDP of the G7, the group of seven of the world's wealthiest nations.
The Australian share market has been hit as well: it fell by 43 per cent last year, the largest annual fall since records began in 1982  -  and twice the previous largest calendar year fall.
It is now clear that even though global capital markets helped drive the strongest period of economic growth in three decades, they had become structurally unsound and unsustainable.
A culture of excessive risk taking - a culture of greed - a culture of excess has brought massive economic disruption to global financial markets and the global economy.
These markets were inadequately supervised and, in the period ahead, one of the tasks of the global community will be to devise warning systems to ensure such a disaster never happens again.
The good news is that Australia has weathered the turbulence far better than many similar countries.
Our banks had a very low level of exposure to bad debt generated in the US.
Of the more than 40 major global financial institutions that have gone bankrupt or been bailed out since the crisis began, none are Australian.
However, Australia is not immune from these events, and difficult days lie ahead.
The US, Japan, Germany and the rest of the euro zone - plus, in our region, New Zealand, Singapore and Hong Kong - have all slipped into recession.
Critically, China has been hit much harder than forecasters had predicted.
Its growth has slowed sharply  -  from 12 per cent in 2007 to 8.5 per cent last year.
Its manufacturing sector  -  which is 40 per cent of its GDP  -  has been contracting for five months.
Because China takes 15 per cent of our exports, its slowdown will affect Australia.
This is an unprecedented crisis that demands an unprecedented response.
In October, for the first time in our history, the Government guaranteed deposits of up to $1 million in all banks, building societies and credit unions.
Our Economic Security Strategy injected $10.4 billion into the economy via payments to pensioners, low and middle income families and first home buyers.
We made a $6.2 billion commitment to strengthen Australia's automotive industry, which directly and indirectly supports 200,000 jobs.
And last month we announced a $4.7 billion nation-building plan to invest in ready-to-go infrastructure projects in road, rail, ports and education.
These are investments that will not simply stimulate the economy now  -  they will build Australia for the long term.
The industries we are investing in  -  including education, information technology and renewable energy  -  are industries of the future that will ensure Australia emerges from this downturn with a stronger, more diverse economy.
We are all in this together
This is a difficult time, and in the short term there is no quick fix.
Things will get worse before they get better.
That is where all of us  -  not just government  -  have a role in lessening the effects of the crisis.
We are all in this together: business, unions, governments, the community sector  -  and every nation in the world.
In these times, employers must do their utmost to protect their workers from dismissal, knowing that these workers will serve them well when times turn good again.
Workers, too, must restrain any wage claims.
I know there are employers who have asked their workers to accept shorter working hours rather than lose their jobs.
That encourages me, because at this time Australians need to look out for each other -- as we have done so many times in the past when the going has got tough.
I repeat  -  we are all in this together.
Right now it's jobs that matter most  -  because the global financial crisis has been the destroyer of jobs.
As I travel around the country, I sense a steadiness among our people  -  an awareness that times are hard, but also a willingness to help each other, to stick together.
I have not the slightest doubt that we as a people will rise to the challenge that lies ahead of us.
And we will emerge from this a stronger, more resilient nation than before  -  and a nation which never loses its heart.
[ends]


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose lands we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
In South Australia I know you take Australia Day very seriously.
For example, on Monday the City of Whyalla is hosting the Great Aussie Thong Throwing Championship.
Followed by the Great Aussie Dummy Spitting Championship.
Followed by a distribution of lamingtons on the foreshore.
What a great day -- I would love to be there.
Australia Day is also a day when -- through the honours we present and the Australian of the Year Awards -- we recognise and thank those people who inspire us  -  in the community, in education, health, business, sport and the arts  -  in so many fields.
It is a day that shows us the best of what this country can be.
And a shining part of that is the work of our medical researchers.
That is why I am delighted to announce $5.6 million of new funding for cancer research -- $3.7 million of which will go to the Institute of Medical and Veterinary Science here in Adelaide for its research into blood cell cancers such as leukemia.
We are very pleased to fund its groundbreaking work.
Today I met the extraordinary Lance Armstrong, who as you know is making his professional cycling comeback in Adelaide after seven Tour de France wins and surviving his own battle with cancer.
Lance has become a passionate advocate for cancer research - and my government strongly supports his cause.
Our last budget included $300 million of funding to fight a disease that leads to the death of more than 38,000 Australians every year.
This week, I am attending Australia Day functions around the country to deliver a series of address on the global economic situation and how the Government is responding to it.
I am doing so because I intend to be absolutely straight with Australians about a crisis we did not cause -- but the effects of which we cannot escape.
I know that many Australians are worried  -  and I understand that worry. 
The Government stands ready to take whatever action is required to see Australia through the difficult times ahead.
The impact of the crisis will be huge  -  but so too will be our response.
We have already spent $36 billion to stimulate the economy, protect jobs and build the high-skilled economy of the future.
With a combination of strong, determined economic management and compassion for those who need support we will craft a more resilient Australia. 
In Sydney yesterday I spoke about the underlying causes of the global financial crisis  -  in particular the ineffective regulation of financial markets as part of the free market fundamentalism, excessive greed and the exorbitant salaries that rewarded irresponsible risk across the financial world.
Today I want to talk specifically about the collapse in credit markets, the difficulties our banks face - and what the Government is doing to respond.
There is no more potent a measure of the dimensions of this crisis than what has happened to equity markets over the past 12 months.
The numbers are frightening.
Global share markets have lost almost half their value since they peaked in October 2007  -  the worst decline since the Great Depression.
That is a loss of US $32 trillion dollars  -  the equivalent of the total annual GDP of the G7, the group of seven of the world's wealthiest industrial nations.
The Australian share market has been hit, too.
It fell by 43 per cent last year, the largest annual fall in Australian stock markets since 1900.
Share markets have been in freefall because investor confidence has collapsed.
At the same time, the cost of borrowing for banks has increased dramatically.
In just over one month between September and October the banks' cost of obtaining credit increased by about five times in Australia, as well as the US.
Since then, credit conditions have eased a little, due to extraordinary measures taken overseas and here.
Nevertheless, credit remains restricted.
For example, the banks' cost of obtaining credit remains double what it was in early September.
Fortunately our banks remain profitable and well capitalized, leaving our banking system better placed than most other developed countries to withstand the global financial crisis.
Because they have lent carefully, they are far less exposed to bad debt from housing loans or failed securities than most of their American and European counterparts.
For example, the sub-prime housing market that triggered the crisis makes up about 15 per cent of the mortgage market in the United States.
In Australia non-conforming loans make up only an estimated one per cent of outstanding loans.
But the Australian economy is global in nature and therefore affected by the health of global banks.
Some cash-strapped foreign banks are scaling back their lending in foreign markets such as Australia.
If banks do not allow clients to re-finance as they would in normal conditions, then companies can be forced to sell assets, often at low value.
This endangers their financial health and that of the whole economy.
According to Merrill Lynch, lending by overseas banks represented more than half of the 285 billion in syndicated loans that have been issued to Australian businesses since 2006.
Of those outstanding loans, 75 billion is scheduled to fall due over the next two years.
If foreign banks do not roll over their share of these loans, it would be difficult for Australia's four major banks to fill the gap on their own.
The withdrawal of foreign bank lending, the tightening in domestic bank lending and the dramatic falls in stock markets are all hurting the real economy.
Growth in business debt more than halved in the six months to September, compared to the same period a year before.
When businesses cannot get loans and are not confident about the future, they can't or won't invest, meaning they can't create jobs and they can't grow.
The supply of credit affects real businesses and affects real jobs.
Australian credit markets are international  -  and Australia has gained much from the internationalisation of our banking system over the last 20 years. But internationalisation comes with risks that must be managed.
In particular, since companies in Australia often raise finance with banks in another country  -  global financial problems abroad can quickly affect our real economy at home.
As the global financial crisis affects banks around the world, some foreign banks are seeking to reduce their exposures, causing them, in some cases, not to roll over their existing credit to Australian businesses.
The Australia government has already developed a special purpose vehicle for the car finance industry to support dealerships as their foreign-owned financiers left Australia, and we will continue to work in partnership with the private sector to do what we can to support Australia's credit markets.
Despite the size of these challenges, I can't stress too much that Australia is better placed than perhaps any other country in the developed world to ride out this crisis.
The Government has moved swiftly and decisively to ensure the stability of the financial and banking sectors, and to support the real economy.
We announced a guarantee of all deposits up to one million dollars held in Australian banks, building societies and credit unions and Australian subsidiaries of foreign-owned banks.
We extended that guarantee to wholesale term funding  -  the money financial institutions raise on the capital markets  -  so that Australian banks, building societies and credit unions could continue to raise funds overseas.
And we acted to support the residential mortgage-backed security market when it was largely frozen by the credit crisis.
We did so by authorising the purchase of eight billion dollars worth of securities from Australian lenders so that they could continue to fund their operations.
Together with the four major banks, we have established a Special Purpose Vehicle worth up to $2 billion to help car dealer financiers who have encountered financing difficulties because of the global financial crisis.
These actions have helped to ease credit conditions  -  as has the Reserve Bank's three percentage point cut in the official interest rate in the three months to December.
The fall in interest rates has provided mortgage relief to families and to small businesses.
The Government has no greater priority than maintaining confidence in the economy.
And maintaining confidence in the banking sector is absolutely crucial to confidence in the broader economy.
And the Government stands ready to take whatever further action is necessary to stabilize financial markets, and to help reopen the private lines of government to business, to get blood flowing through the arteries of the economy.
Ladies and gentlemen, as I said earlier, Australia is part of the global economy.
That means that we can never be completely immune from an economic disease of this potency.
But it is equally true that we can only find a cure for this malaise through concerted international cooperation.
These are grim times right around the globe.
However, I do believe that the darkest hour is just before the dawn.
It is after midnight in Washington right now - but in just a few hours time Barack Obama will be sworn in as the 44th President of the United States.
Throughout their history Americans have distinguished themselves by being at their best when times are at their worst and just such a time has arrived for America and for the world. 
They responded to the divisions that threatened their great Union by electing Abraham Lincoln.
They responded to the ravages of the Great Depression and the Second World War by electing and re-electing Franklin Roosevelt.
And now they have set Barack Obama the mighty task of rebuilding the American economy and leading the recovery of the international economy: a great task for a great man.
I believe from everything I have seen, read and heard and from the conversations that I have had with him that the American people have chosen well in their new President.
I believe that the measures President-elect Obama is preparing to take will sit well with the approach of the Australian Government.
He is committed to a major economic stimulus package. Ours is already underway.
He will move for much stronger regulation of the financial markets rejecting the “anything goes” approach which has so clearly failed.
Last year while addressing the UN I called on the international community to adopt “globally agreed best practice standards of financial regulation”.
I will continue to press this position and welcome any moves by his Administration to support better regulation of financial institutions in America and abroad.
If there is one thing we all now know it is that only when America properly regulates its own financial institutions will Australia's markets be immune from the mess we are now managing.
As I have said before  -  “when markets fail, governments must act”.
These are dark times but a new age and a new optimism  -  tempered by the magnitude of the challenges ahead  -  is about to dawn across the Pacific.
Barack Obama truly is the hope of our time and I say this to the new President and to the new people, Australia as always stands ready to work with America in the great challenges that lie ahead.
In these difficult times, confidence is not just an economic concept.
It is something we can all generate.
Confidence in each other and confidence in ourselves, confidence in the nation and all the strengths that we have deployed at difficult times in our history.
We are all in this together all Australians and we can all help each other to get through this time together.
Jobs matter most and jobs are being lost.
Together with sacrifice all round we must rebuild jobs.
This will be hard.
But we either just watch as the global financial crisis wreaks its havoc on Australian jobs
Or we can have a go.
This Government will leave no stone unturned to see Australia through.
And if we a community are united we will see Australia through - building on our strengths, supporting the weak and crafting a more resilient Australia for the future.


Your Excellency Governor Marie Bashir, Administrator of the Commonwealth  -  which makes you Marie, my boss. So I promise very much to behave. At least for this week.
And to Nick. To Premier Nathan Rees. To Karen and other members of Bernie's family. It's good to see you all here. You've grown hair since I last saw you. It's much longer. Good to see you mate.
And brothers, his family, his friends, work colleagues, all those suffering from asbestos-related diseases.
Bob Carr, and I would reinforce entirely every word entirely of what Nathan just said. Bob demonstrated real leadership in taking that mob on. That's what it was, taking that mob on and prevailing. And I think that is a great achievement.
Professor Nico, our welcome guest from the Kingdom of the Netherlands. And may you long reside with us.
John Murphy, our local Federal Member, a Parliamentary Secretary in the Federal Government. Senator Doug Cameron I think is here as well and distinguished guests one and all.
I begin by acknowledging the First Australians on whose land we meet and whose culture we celebrate as the oldest continuing culture in human history.
I walked in here just a minute ago and one thing struck me, and that was that photograph. He's looking at us as he looks at us still. Staring into our hearts and staring into our souls and asking this deep and searching question: are you buggers fair dinkum? That's what he is saying to us.
You know that face is an extraordinary face. It is a face which speaks of suffering. A face which speaks of strength. A face which speaks loud and clear and with resonance and with compassion. And that's why he leaves such an indelible imprint on all of us. All of us.
You know, I only met Bernie a few times during the course of 2007. And each time you met him you took something else away. I mean I felt as though I was being pastored to rather than doing the pastoring. And other people have had this experience as well.
He was an extraordinary bloke. And this country, Australia, is the richer for him. And it continues to be the richer for him and the celebration of his memory.
Today history was also made and lived in the United States with the inauguration of the first African American President in the history of that great American democracy.
This is a great moment not just for the people of America but for all people around the world who believe in democracy, who believe in freedom, who believe in progress, and who believe in fairness.
The United States of America is one of Australia's closest and our most important ally. And the passing of the presidency from President Bush to President Obama is another link in the chain that ties our two nations together.
President Obama today became the 13th President of the United States to become joint-custodian of the Australia-United States Alliance. Thirteen US Presidents, 13 Australian Prime Ministers have now served and strengthened this alliance. An alliance that transcends governments of whichever political persuasion and links our two great people and our two great nations.
From Roosevelt, from Curtin, across two-thirds of a century, uniting two great peoples in a common mission of hope, of freedom, of fairness, of progress.
President Obama's message of hope is a message that resonates not just across the continent of the United States but across Australia and across the globe. Hope is the fuel of progress. Hope is the fuel of human progress, and the fuel of human progress throughout our human history.
And President Obama's message of progress, fuelled by that hope and achieved by hard work, has rarely been a message as prescient as it is, given the challenges of today.
Economic storm clouds are on the horizon. The task of tackling climate change lies before us. As allies we share great challenges in Afghanistan and beyond. But in President Obama I say this, Australia will have a friend and an ally to shoulder these challenges together.
To mark this historic day I'll be writing to President Obama on behalf of the Government of Australia and the people of Australia, to offer him our congratulations and to offer him our support in shouldering these challenges of the future, together.
Today we honour the memory of this great Australian Bernie Banton in opening the world's first dedicated asbestos research centre.
This centre has just one purpose - to improve the lives of asbestos victims and their families through new inventive treatments and solutions to asbestos related diseases. The centre's work is important for the lives of every person whose exposure to asbestos, however small, has resulted years later in asbestos-related diseases.
I believe Bernie would be proud of everything that we are doing here today. Bernie was a true believer. Bernie was a true believer from central casting. Bernie was a fighter. Bernie was a prize fighter. Bernie was an Australian through and through.
He never gave up in fighting for a fair go for the asbestos workers and their families. A fair go from James Hardie, for a fair go in getting access to good and decent medical care for all who needed it.
Because of Bernie's tireless efforts, many more Australians are now aware of the terrible nature of asbestos-related diseases such as mesothelioma. But few of aware of just how this incidence is rising.
Every year around 600 Australians are diagnosed with asbestos-related diseases, of which 350 occur here in NSW. Next year around 750 Australians will be diagnosed with asbestos-related diseases.
These are bad figures. The incidence of these diseases is rising because it takes decades from the time of exposure to the time of diagnosis of the disease. By 2020 it is estimated Australia will have 13,000 cases of mesothelioma, and a further 40,000 people will have contracted asbestos-related cancer. These are very bad figures.
All kinds of Australians can receive the diagnosis of an asbestos-related disease. Of course many of those who contract these diseases were exposed at work, especially in asbestos production.
Some were full time factory workers, others just students or casual workers doing a summer-time job. Some may be once, maybe a few times inhaled a few of those deadly fibres, like the wives or mums who shook out and washed the dusty worker's clothes.
And others were just kids having fun playing around on a building site in their street or in their backyard when renovations were being done and there were building materials lying around.
These were just honest Australians. These were just innocent Australians. These were just working Australians, supporting their families, supporting themselves. Doing no harm to anybody but great harm was done to them. Working Australians whose lives and whose families' lives were changed forever because of a few tiny fibres breathed in some 20 or 30 years ago.
I am proud and we are proud to have known well one of those victims - the bloke we honour today in the naming of this new research institute.
The establishment of this centre is a major boost to the research into asbestos-related diseases conducted here on the Concord Hospital Campus where Bernie was treated. I am pleased that the Asbestos Disease Research Institute has recruited Professor van Zandwijk, an internationally renowned thoracic oncologist and asbestos researcher to lead the centre's work.
You're a welcome guest in our country.
The Australian Government is committed to being a partner in the national efforts to improve the diagnosis and treatment of asbestos-related diseases.
From 2007 the Government has provided $6.2 million over three years to the National Research Centre for Asbestos Related Diseases, which links together 11 asbestos research centres around Australia.
Last month the Government announced $2.5 million from 2010 for the establishment of a Centre of Research Excellence into Asbestos-Related Disease. The Government has also announced the Bernie Banton Asbestos-Research Fellowship, to support an eminent researcher working in the area of mesothelioma or asbestos-related diseases.
To build on these initiatives I'm pleased to announce today that the Commonwealth will contribute $5 million to support the Bernie Banton Centre's final fit-out costs and to provide a dedicated research facility.
Asbestos carries a terrible human toll. And it is important for the Commonwealth to partner in national efforts to improve treatment which will give hope to the victims of asbestos related diseases.
Let me say a few more things about Bernie and some of the things that he stood for, and the movement which supported him through it all. Bernie Banton was a union man. Bernie Banton was about the rights of working people. Bernie Banton was about jobs for working people.
The truth is 2009 will be one of the toughest years Australia's faced in decades as the global financial crisis wreaks havoc on Australian jobs.
The financial crisis began in the sub-prime mortgage market in the United States. But because of the excesses with the extreme capitalism it has now spread across the world. This statistics are bad. But the human reality behind those statistics is much, much worse. Every job that is lost is a person or a family anxious about how bills will be paid, how children or dependents will be cared for, how they can contribute to society without a job.
We're all in this together, each and every one of us. This crisis was not of Australia's making. Let me tell you the Government of Australia will be at it day and night to respond with strength and determination in dealing with it. The Government's been up front about the fact that Australia will be affected. Growth will slow, unemployment will rise. And given the deteriorating global outlook we must acknowledged that conditions could even get worse.
Already we've seen job cuts at many Australian major corporations. And many small businesses are also finding it tough to keep their staff employed. In the coming year it's jobs that matters most, because the global financial crisis has been the destroyer of jobs and Australian jobs.
I simply say this to you and to the nation. In the year which unfolds, I don't intend to gild the lily one bit. What I intend to do is to be upfront about the impact of this global financial crisis on the economy and on jobs all the way through. I intend to be upfront with the Australian nation about what we are doing and intend to do about it. The great thing about Australia, the great thing about a bloke like him, is that we come through tough times together.
Bernie Banton. You know something, he meant a lot to those of us who met him for a time. But for those for whom he was a loved member of family, husband, dad, grandfather, and others, he was something much deeper. He was a dad, grandfather, husband, mate. For the rest of us he was also an Australian hero. You know, he was a hero in an age where we've now come to believe that there weren't any heroes anymore. Bernie proved all those cynics wrong. He's one of them.
He was in so many ways, some would say, an ordinary Aussie bloke. But an ordinary bloke with an extraordinary heart, and an extraordinary resolve, an extraordinary strength, an extraordinary determination. A man who just didn't spend years battling his own diseases, horrible as they were, but who also lost his brother Ted from mesothelioma. He lost many of his mates and also saw his brother Albert contract asbestosis.
Yet Bernie never became bitter. Through his darkest days he stayed full of fight and full of life. He never stopped thinking of how he could help those who suffered from these devastating diseases. To make sure they'd have support and help in those long years they'd spend battling declining health. And to make sure their families weren't left with nothing after their loved one had gone.
Bernie was as tough as nails. He had to be to keep up the fight campaigning across the country and in and out of court cases, year after year. I still don't know how he did it. I still don't know how he could front each day and take up the fight. Any of you who had been sick at anytime, think about the national preoccupations of life. How do I physically get through the day? How do I mentally get through the day? And then, okay it's time to front in court to take on the other mob. What an extraordinary quality that this bloke had. Extraordinary. Anytime you feel sorry for yourself, have a look at this bloke's life. Extraordinary.
Many of you here today stood alongside Bernie through his long battle. And for those, too numerous to name in this gathering, I would salute your continued solidarity with him through to the end. The political level, the union level, of course his family, his mates and his loved ones.
As I said before my own association with Bernie was fairly short, just a few meetings during the course of 2007. I remember sending him greetings on election night 2007. Those meetings left me with a strong and lasting impression of this man of great courage, determination and heart. And one of my earliest duties after being elected Prime Minister, and one of my saddest, was to attend his funeral.
Yet ultimately, Bernie's life was about hope. It's about how you can make things different. How you can make them better. Not sit around and mope and wallow, do what circumstances may cause you to conclude you can only do. Bernie was elsewhere engaged. How can I make this better? If not for me, then for a whole bunch of other people. That's what marks him out there in that extraordinary column of human beings that make a difference.
You couldn't help but be with him and not be inspired by him. He took everything life could throw at him and yet at the end he was still standing tall. That's why Bernie caught the nation's imagination, something we saw in the extraordinary response to his death in November of that year. And I believe Bernie will long be remembered as one of the great Australians of our times.
I would like to congratulate everyone who's been part of making possible the vision of this dedicated research facility. In particular the University of Sydney. The ANZAC Research Institute. The Government of New South Wales. The Dust Diseases Board and Concord Hospital. As well as Bob Carr, who I referred to before. Each of whom, each of which, has played a key role in supporting and funding and building this centre.
I listened carefully to what the Professor had to say before about the motto - informal or formal I'm not sure of this new centre  -  ‘join forces'. I think that's a good motto because when you're dealing with a disease as insidious like this, it's across the spectrum. Translational research taking an observation of a patient through to how we conduct a clinical research and laboratory about what the patient exhibits, back to the patient for further trial, and then through to a better outcome.
I plied the Professor before with key and searching questions about how long it will take till we get to the cause of this thing and to a cure of it. These are tough things and scientists hate those questions posed by politicians.
But you know something? The job of all governments is to get behind you. What we've done today is volume one. You need more - come back to us. This is important stuff.
It's important because it affects working people everywhere, here and around the world. And it's important because this bloke taught us it was important. I thank you.


Distinguished Australians one and all. And I begin by acknowledging the First Australians on whose land we meet and whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
We reflect on that for one moment - the oldest continuing cultures in human history. What an extraordinary privilege it is for those of us who arrived in recent times, to share this continent with our Indigenous brothers and sisters.
Those from around the world look in wonder and awe at this fact, that we have among us this living link to deepest antiquity. I think people in this country often overlook that fact. Those around the world often have a deeper and broader perspective.
Mention was just made at the fact that it is not yet a year since the apology to the Stolen Generations was delivered. That apology was just the start. It is the start of a long, broad and big road to national reconciliation. A long, broad and deep road about closing the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians. It will be a hard road. It will have many pitfalls. But the good news is this, we have begun to walk that road together. And we're going to walk it, and we're going to walk it through.
As I listened today to the beautiful voice of Deborah Cheetham and I was so moved by the beauty of her voice and her art, it reminded me again of the depth and breadth of this enterprise we have called reconciliation. It is about saying sorry. It is about closing the gap in very practical ways. It is equally about all of us as Australians comfortably owning our wonderful Indigenous heritage, comfortably owning our wonderful Indigenous heritage. Being charged and challenged by its art, being charged and challenged by its music, being charged and challenged by its spirituality. And all these things, fashioning and shaping, something new and I believe potentially quite wonderful in this land called Australia.
Australia Day, we'll look at the diversity. This morning I've been in Hobart at a breakfast, cooking snags with the Premier. Today I am here and tonight I am in Brissie. And the wonderful thing as I travel around the nation is to again, sample and see how out of the enormous diversity of this land Australia we have fashioned a nation, a continent for a nation, a nation for a continent.
And we have come from all over. Every part of God's earth. Yet when we have come here there's been something which has been binding and fusing about the sentiment of this place which is, whatever our differences great and small, there is a bout of character which is this  -  built on respect, built on tolerance, built on looking after one another, and about this thing called fashioning a common destiny for us all.
For in all this diversity there is unity. In things essential, unity, in things non-essential, diversity. And in all things, this community called Australia. It is a wonderful country. And if you travel around the world as so many people in this room do, you could come again to these shores and recognise how truly wonderful it is.
What I have done this last few days and in the week leading up to Australia Day is a bit different. Normally, Australia Day I am told, as you occupy the Office of the Prime Minister and are handed your brief on Australia Day, consists of the following: get up out of bed; go to Australia Day reception in and around Parliament House, Canberra; come home and have reception at Lodge in Canberra; go to bed. Therese and I thought we would do it differently.
And so what we've done this week and Therese has been with me for part of it and is here today in Melbourne as well, is each day in the week leading up to Australia Day to spend some time in each of our state capitals and to spend some time with local communities such as we have here and gathered in this marvellous ballroom here in Melbourne, talking and reflecting for a moment on our triumphs past, our tragedies past, but also our destiny ahead. And it has been good and an honour for me so to do these last several days.
And today to be here in Melbourne, this is a marvellous city. I say that with all the inbuilt objectivity of a Queenslander. This is a truly wonderful place. Therese is a little bias, she did a fair bit of her schooling here but I forgive her for that. As you wonder these streets and you sample its culture, what you see here is a truly marvellous city, a jewel in the crown of the nation - its architecture, its intellectual depth, its cultural life, its dynamism. This is a great city and yours is a great contribution to the nation.
I wander its streets - and my habit unlike my predecessor is not to don the green and gold and wander of the morning, but to much less obtrusively or shall I say more unobtrusively, wander around of an evening and go for a walk - and just to see this city lit up at night, it is a beautiful place. And Lord Mayor, I'm looking to you to keep it that way.
In his inauguration speech yesterday, President Obama spoke of the impact of the great economic crisis which washes across the world. He spoke of jobs lost. He spoke of businesses shutted. And these things are true, not just in America, for what began in America has now been extended across the world. Every economy, every country, every community on earth. People are anxious, people are concerned, people are afraid. And these things are true because the consequences of which we speak are real.
But what is equally true is the strengths with which we as a nation have. What is equally true is the strengths which we as an economy have. And what is equally true is the strengths with which we as a people have. Deep strengths of resilience. And strength also in the course of action that we have now embarked upon to see this nation through, to see Australia through this crisis and to have an Australia even more resilient through the burnishing and testing of this crisis.
But the strength that we have as a nation and the policy that we have formed as a Government are enhanced by something new, something intangible but something profoundly real.
I speak here of the rebirth of American leadership. President Obama spoke directly of that which others have hinted at obliquely in recent times and he said, and I quote him, “less measurable but no less profound, is the sapping of confidence across our land. A nagging fear that America's decline is inevitable.”
So said the President in his inaugural. But then, both in the content of his address, in the strength of his character and equally by the very fact of his election, the President demonstrated once again America's great capacity for renewal.
The world needs American leadership now more than ever before. The world needs American strength now more than ever before. The world needs American resolve now more than ever before. For America to harness the great power of its economy, for America to harvest the great energy of its democracy, for America to draw from the great well of its essential decency.
For America, a leadership in deliberation of policy that is consultative and not unilateral. And a leadership that still in the execution of that policy is resolute and unwavering.
For again I say today what I have said so often throughout my public career. America remains an overwhelming force for good in the world. It has been so in the past. It will be so in the future. And that force is now needed more than ever before.
We see now the rebirth of US global leadership across the full spectrum of challenges we collectively face. In security policy, a clear message to terrorism. In foreign policy, the hand of friendship extended to the Muslim world. In development and new commitment, to the poorest of the poor, across the poorest nations of the world. In climate change where American leadership has been so lacking for so long, now a new and vital engagement. And critically, most critically now, the global economy - the re-stimulation of the American economy, the proper regulation of financial markets, the reform of the international financial institutions. And equally global engagement with the other major emerging economies, including those of China and India in rebuilding this global economy.
Because the message for the world is a message for us all here in Australia. We are all in this together. We are all in this together - within Australia, across the world.
What America does is crucial. What Europe does is crucial. What China does is crucial. What China does is not just crucial in terms of aggregate global demand as one of the world's largest surplus economies, it is doubly critical for Australia.
China is now stimulating its domestic demand, of vital importance to its own growth given the collapse of American and European export orders. But vital also for taking exports, more exports from America, from Europe and from others in order to contribute more broadly to global economic recovery.
The stakes for Australia are doubly high. Consider this. China's growth projection for 2009 has fallen by $US 200 billion, about one third of the entire size of the Australian economy. And that means a massive $5 billion fall immediately in Australian exports. Just because of China alone, and with a $5 billion consequential impact on Australian jobs.
We are all in this together. China's economic recovery therefore is as important for Australia's recovery as it is for America's recovery. 
The good thing about the lines of America's response to the current crisis is that there are now so many parallels with our own. President Obama's rejection of free market fundamentalism. To quote the President again, “the question before us”, he said yesterday, “is not whether the market is a force for good or ill, it's power to generate wealth and expand freedom is of course unmatched. But the crisis has reminded us that without a watchful eye, the market can spin out of control. And the nation cannot prosper long if it favours only the prosperous.”
This parallels our approach, this Government's approach here in Australia. The days of extreme capitalism and unrestrained greed must be gone forever.
The dimensions of the crisis are truly global. The dimensions of our policy response must also be equally global.
There are four essential elements to the global response to the crisis. First, governments around the world must act to restore the stability of the financial system, so that access to credit improves. Credit flows have been devastated by the worst disruptions to financial markets since the Great Depression. According to the Bank of England's latest financial stability report, the global financial system is digesting mark to market losses on debt instruments of about $2.8 trillion, $2.8 trillion.
And the combined impact of a lack of liquidity in falling asset values has caused more than 30 financial institutions around the world to collapse, or to require rescuing through partial nationalisation or full nationalisation. As banks suffer, so too does private credit, credit which is essential to support businesses to operate and grow, and to support household consumption.
In recent months, global credit markets have all but dried up with credit growth at its lowest levels since the Second World War.
And 2009 as it begins, it becomes clear that financial markets are continuing to deteriorate. Around the world the December quarter bank reporting season exposed more losses and write downs. Merrill Lynch, Bank of America, Citigroup, Deutsche Bank, the numbers in each breathtaking. In response to expected losses by its banks, the British Government has acted in the last week to provide another 350 billion pounds of assistance as part of a new bailout package. This is in addition to the 500 billion pounds package announced by the British Government in October.
Around the world, governments are implementing a range of complimentary policies to support the banking system, including injections of capitals as well as measures to take toxic assets off balance sheets. These are unprecedented measures by national governments, amounting to the effective nationalisation of large parts of the banking system, as well as a massive risk transfer to the state. Beyond immediate stabilisation, the world must also face up to the need of radically reforming global financial markets.
The prevailing neo-liberal orthodoxy that has dominated financial market regulations over the last several decades held that global financial markets would ultimately self correct. The invisible hand of unfettered free market forces would find their own equilibrium.
As Joseph Stiglitz, the renowned American economist, has caustically observed, the reason the invisible hand often seems invisible is that often it is not there. Financial markets have not self corrected. The state has been called in. The state has been called in.
Governments now realise that in response to this crisis, nations must work together to craft consistent global financial regulations. We must establish stronger global disclosure standards for systemically important financial institutions. We must also build stronger supervisory frameworks to provide incentives for more responsible corporate conduct, including executive remuneration.
Third we must take this opportunity to reform existing global public institutions, in particular the International Monetary Fund. The IMF must be provided with the powers and with the resources necessary to act effectively in the current crisis, with the various national economies, particularly emerging economies that will be badly affected by the crisis. Further, the IMF's authority to undertake prudential analysis must be expanded and its early warning system for institutional vulnerabilities enhanced. And its governance arrangements must be reformed. It makes no sense for the governance structure of the global financial system today, to reflect the balance of power as it existed in 1944 when the IMF was established.
The fourth element of the global response is of course to deal with the whole challenge of stimulating the global economy through macro-economic policy. The cost of failing to intervene as a government, and not stimulating the economy, would be extraordinary. Former Prime Minister Tony Blair of the United Kingdom has encouraged governments around the world to spend saying that governments should do whatever it takes to get the blood pumping back around the financial system again.
This Government will not sit on its hands while Australians lose their jobs, superannuation, and house values. We will act to get the blood pumping around the economy again. That is what stimulus is all about.
Here at home, the Government has sought to act decisively to strengthen the Australian economy at this time of unprecedented external duress.
There have been four key dimensions to our response. We have acted to support and to stabilise our own financial markets, firstly guarantees to retail deposits in Australian banks, to underpin confidence.
Second, maintaining liquidity in our financial system by legislating for an increase in future issuance of government bonds, by up to 25 billion. Third, acting to protect financial institutions from predatory speculators by introducing a ban on short-selling on financial markets, and yesterday taking a decision to extent that temporary ban on short-selling of financial stocks.
Four, supporting competition and liquidity in the mortgage market through the purchase of $8 billion of residential mortgage backed securities. And five, reaching agreement finally with the states on the reform of the regulation of credit across Australia with a seamless, national regulatory framework for the future.
In each of these areas, Australia has acted early. Often anticipating events. But one of greater short term challenges is to help support credit. Second, linked to financial stability, the Government is acting to restore credit flows in the private economy of Australia. This is of fundamental importance. Credit flows are the blood which flows through the arteries of the economy to enable businesses to continue to invest or to sustain their existing investments.
The availability of credit is essential for the health of business. It's essential there for the health of households and the health of employment. Total credit in Australia today is $1.9 trillion. Nearly one trillion of that is housing. Over three quarters of a trillion is for business and about $150 billion is for other personal lending. ABS data in November showed that growth in Australian private credit has halved from a year ago.
The slowing in credit growth is evident across all of the sectors  -  housing, business and other personal credit. To ensure that Australian banks have funds to lend, the Government took a historic decision, October 12, to guarantee term wholesale funding for APRA regulated banks, building societies, and credit unions.
The Government's decision has helped to soothe financial markets. We have seen an immediate effect in the wholesale guarantee. As the global financial crisis deepened in September 2008, there was increasing difficulty in raising funds offshore. By September, their raising had fallen to $1.7 billion, down from the $13 billion a month earlier in the year.
In October there were no raisings at all. The guarantee that we introduced had an immediate effect. By December offshore raising was back to $15.4 billion, the highest in the past few years and this was all guaranteed by government guarantees.
Had we not done so, the consequences would have been extraordinary. In January 2009, this amount has already grown to $19.8 billion. Domestic raising almost all of it again using the Government guarantee, has also recovered, domestic raisings for $7.7 billion in December and $6.4 billion so far in January, again the highest in recent years.
This increase in the bank bond issuance is positive for Australia. It will give our domestic banks much needed funds to support lending in Australia. The Australian economy is global in nature and therefore limited, therefore effected by the health of global banks as well as the impact of those banks on Australian banks.
Some cash strapped foreign banks are scaling back their lending in foreign markets, including Australia. If banks do not allow credit to refinance, as they would in normal conditions, then companies can be forced to sell assets, often at very low value. This endangers their financial health and the financial health of the entire economy.
According to Merrill Lynch, lending by overseas banks represents more than half of the $285 billion in syndicated loans that have been issued to Australian businesses since 2006. Of those outstanding loans, $75 billion is scheduled to fall due over the next couple of years. If foreign banks do not roll over their share of these loans, it will be difficult for Australia's four major banks to fill the gap on their own.
A significant share of this is in the commercial property sector.
Foreign banks have more than $45 billion in exposure to Australian commercial property, around 28.5 per cent of total bank lending to the sector. The supply of credit, foreign and domestic to real businesses in Australia effects real jobs. Everything is related to everything else.
As the global financial crisis effects banks around the world, some foreign banks are seeking to reduce their exposures. And there is a risk of some not rolling over their existing credit to Australian businesses.
The Australian Government, in partnership with the major banks has been working through this challenge in recent weeks and months. And we continue to work on this challenge in close partnership with those banks. And we intend to do whatever is necessary to continue to support the flow of private credit to the Australian economy.
Alongside these efforts, the Government is also engaged in the other arm of policy and that is through fiscal stimulus supporting total demand. What we have sought to do through the measures we have announced is to combine the need to stimulate the economy now as well as build the infrastructure that we need for tomorrow.
That is the right approach - supporting growth, supporting jobs and building productivity for the future. That underpinned the decision we took late last year in support of a special $4.6 billion announcement of infrastructure, much of which, or part of which flowed through here, to the state of Victoria.
There is more to be done. The Government's determination on the question of stimulus for infrastructure is again to do what is ever necessary to continue to support growth and jobs in these difficult global circumstances.
The twin goals again: jobs in the short term, supporting where we can; and productivity the long term through building the infrastructure we need for the 21st Century. These are the challenges we face and these are those we intend to embrace in the period ahead.
This is just the beginning. 2009 will test us all. It will test Governments, national, state and local. It will test unions, it will test businesses, it will test families, it will test individuals, it will test community and charitable organisations. It will test the very fabric of who we are as a people and as a nation.
The good thing about this country is that we are a resilient lot and we do, consistent with our best instincts, look out for one another. We are all in this together, every one of us. Australia did not cause this crisis. This crisis came from abroad. But Australia must now deal with this crisis, as we have been.
As Prime Minister my intention is to continue as I did last year, which is to speak straight and direct to the Australian people about two things: the level of the problem we face, as well as the strengths that we have and the strategy to see Australia through this crisis as well.
This, I believe is the necessary element of leadership required in helping navigate Australia through these difficult times. Franklin Delano Roosevelt once said he didn't believe on what he described as the ‘bally-ho' school of politics. That is, bally-hoeing people into believing that they should be confident when there is nothing to be confident about.
What I believe and what FDR believed in is this: realistic hope, realistic optimism, realistic confidence. And for that to have content and substance and deliverability, key elements of decisions must underpin them. That is why we have acted to stabilise financial markets. That is why we have acted to inject stimulus into the economy. That is why we are acting to invest in the infrastructure of the 21st century. And that is why we will take whatever decisions are necessary to underpin those goals in this difficult year which lies ahead.
Confidence, confidence is key. Getting it right in policy, getting it right in the projects we support, in laying out the roads and rail systems, the ports, the upgrades, the broadband, the schools, the universities, the Tafe colleges, the hospitals  -  all those things that this Government will be embarking upon to build in the year ahead, that is one part of it.
But the other part of it lies here. It lies in the attitude. It lies in the spirit. It lies in the confidence of the people, and that is where we have all got a role to play. Together, as we are all in this together, we will see Australia through.
[ends]


Your Excellency the Governor of Victoria, distinguished Australians one and all, distinguished representatives of foreign governments one and all. 
This Australia Day as in times past provides us with a national moment for reflection. A national moment for reflecting on our nation's past achievements and a national moment for reflection on the challenges which lie ahead.
It is also a time where we reflect more deeply of the values which inspire us as a nation. Those which have shaped us over many decades and centuries and those which will shape us and guide us for the years ahead.
One of those deepest values is respect. Respect for one another, respect for the traditions we variously bring to these shores and respect most fundamentally for the first Australians on whose land we meet and whose culture we celebrate as the oldest continuing culture in human history.
This is a marvellous land. A land rich with opportunity, a land where we have managed to craft a nation for a continent and a continent for a nation. We've done so through blood, sweat and tears over many generations. We've done so through times which have been difficult and through times of triumph. Times of tragedy, times that have required great feats of human endurance.
And through all of that, what we have exhibited is this core value as well. Not just respect. Not just tolerance. Not just acceptance of difference. But above all these things, an overpowering sense of our unity as a people and as a nation.
The wonderful thing that I celebrate each day about this nation of ours, Australia, and which I see reflected on the faces around this room is from where we have come to fashion this thing called Australia. Each person bringing to this great culture and to this great land something new, something different, something diverse. Yet all united in this great value that we attach to this land, Australia.
A land which we hold dear, a land which we will defend and a land which we will use for the benefit of others as well, beyond our shores. Unity and diversity, what an extraordinary and great achievement of this land, Australia; this country, Australia.
His Excellency said before that, in his remarks, that he's recently been with our Young Ambassadors for Science. I think I can spot them from their shirts. There seems to be a veritable squadron of them here, from Australia and from beyond our shores. If I could add my words of welcome to each of them.
And then with a word of encouragement. This nation, shaped by great values of respect and tolerance, great values of our unity of purpose amidst the diversity, which has given our nation expression. Also values of deep learning, the pursuit of knowledge through education and within that the absolute importance of science.
A nation prospers to the extent to which it values the education of its young. A nation prospers if within that education we also attach great priority to the wonder that is science. And science is a wonder. It is to be encouraged and fuelled and instilled in the minds of the young across our nation.
So for those of you who are contemplating what the future may hold for you in the sciences which have grabbed and arrested your passions, what I'd say to you as your Prime Minister is  -  seize hold of that passion, hold it dear and fashion a future for yourselves, your country and the world.
If we reflected back on a mere 200 years of the settled history of this country and where scientific knowledge stood for the latter part of the 18th century and where it now stands, and wonder aloud at the achievements of our scientists from Banks to the present - Joseph Banks, not those which take your money - this has been an achievement writ large; an achievement from which we have all benefited. An achievement which lies under so much of what we now benefit from in medicine, from what we so benefit across all the applications.
This nation, Australia, as it approaches its 21st century must and will invest in our education. Must and will invest in our schools, in our early childhood centres, in our universities, in our technical colleges, in our research institutes, and within that take the status of science to a new level.
My vision for this country is that we are the best educated, best trained, best skilled workforce anywhere in the world. To do that we don't just sit around and hope for it to happen. We have to fashion it, we have to structure it, we have to fund it, we have to invest for it.
But that is one thing. The other part of this - to have among us a new cadre of young, enthusiastic scientific pioneers who will take that message of science into the future. So that is our vision.
Beyond that, as his Excellency has also indicated, the year ahead contains within it extraordinary challenges given the impact of the global financial crisis.
I said in remarks in Melbourne earlier today that I have great confidence in our ability as a nation to see our way through this crisis. I have great confidence in our people to exhibit a resilience, a steeliness, a calm and a resolve which together with appropriately formed policy will see Australia through.
Resilient, strong, purposeful. But through that purpose and through that process, extending always a helping hand to others at home and abroad. This crisis will be a test of who we are as a people, who we are as a community and who we are as neighbours because many will be hurt by it.
One response will be ours as Government to extend an appropriate hand of support for those who need it. And we will. But at a different level, at a very personal level, at a very pastoral level, it is important that each of us takes on the responsibility of extending the hand of friendship when those who suffer from this crisis experience that suffering.
As I look out across this extraordinary room, which I'm told is his Excellency's breakfast room, which he uses on small occasions. I'm sorry. It's the lunch room. It's not a bad room is it? You know the whole story about Buckingham Palace and the Ballroom so I won't take you though that one again.
But when I look out across this extraordinary room, this sea of faces, all people of leadership within their communities, each one of you in your own sphere - leaders. Reflect on this as the year unfolds.
Leadership will be called for at all levels, to support and encourage those who are going to find this year tough and rough. Not just within the churches and the charitable sector, that is their permanent mission, their lot, their vocation. But beyond that as well.
Leadership in every community organisation, every sporting group, every other social organisation in our country. Small business, local government. The task of leadership will be out there to extend the hand of friendship and support as well. And as I look in the faces of those here, I have absolute confidence that those values of leadership will be called forth and delivered, as the nation at times requires.
I might conclude on a personal note, and say something about this great city of Melbourne in the great state of Victoria. As I said earlier today I can do so with complete impartiality of being an independent Queensland observer. You doubt the independence of Queenslanders? Well spotted.
You know you live in a fantastic city. This is a wonderful part of Australia. This city is a jewel in the nation's crown as I said in earlier remarks today. And I believe it has an enormous future in shaping Australia's destiny. Hold it close. Husband it well. Shape its buildings and its culture, its intellectual life and its cultural life in a way which enriches the nation as you have so much done in the past. This is a fantastic part of Australia and be proud of it.
And to conclude on one further personal note. We have among us today a centenarian in training - Dame Elisabeth Murdoch. (Applause)
By the way how just great to see, I visited Dame Elisabeth this afternoon. And I was down there at Cruden and extending Therese and my birthday wishes for an event which is about to unfold. I left there at about ten past five. I got here at four minutes past six. Dame Elisabeth was happily saying farewell to me. And she arrived three minutes after me here. This is a centenarian on wheels, with turbo-charge.
And if his Excellency would extend to me the great indulgence which I'm about to exercise even if he doesn't, but I ask you one and all, in anticipation of this event which is about to happen, her birthday, and to reflect also her great contribution philanthropically to the state, to the city and to this nation - Three cheers for Dame Elisabeth Murdoch. Hip hip. Hooray. Hip hip. Hooray. Hip hip. Hooray. And a very happy Australia Day.


Thank you David. And to all my parliamentary and ministerial colleagues and Dick Adams, Julie Collins, Duncan Kerr, Carol Brown. Others from the State parliament, friends one and all.
It's great to be here in Tasmania, in the lead-up to Australia Day.
I'm doing something a little different this year, which hasn't been done in past years. And that is as we move to Australia Day itself, to get around to each of the State capitals and to participate in celebrations with local people.
I'll be in Melbourne this afternoon, I was in Adelaide the day before and I was in Sydney the day before that. I'll be getting around, including Brisbane, where I come from and then over to Perth.
Because you know something? This nation of ours is bigger than the nation's capital. It's writ large and it's writ deep and it's writ broad in the lives and the experiences of Australians across this vast continent. That's why it's so good to be here.
I'd like to thank David for his inspiring oration. I notice that baby Sophie then went to sleep.
I think that was in anticipation of my speech. She's a sweetheart.
And for the other proud parents of young bubs, the half a million Tasmanians, that's a great league to be in. This will be a time when they look back at the bub photographs on their 21st birthday and say I was there at an important point of this State's history and its future.
It's also good to be here in Australia's oldest backyard. I was given a potted history of where we are as I walked in. These Commissariat Stores behind me were built in 1808, the oldest, I'm advised, public building, the oldest building, the oldest remaining building in any capital city in Australia. It's extraordinary, just extraordinary.
And as David rightly reminds us Australia Day involves other reflections as well. And I begin my remarks by acknowledging the first Australians on whose land we meet and whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
The great thing about Australia Day is we reflect on our strengths as a people, as a society, as a nation. Where we've come from and where we hope to take our nation to.
And if you look across this vast land of ours and begin to reflect for a moment on its absolute diversity in terms of where we've all come from, the parts of the world from which we've come, the backgrounds from which we've come and yet together we've forged a nation for a continent; a continent for a nation. This is an extraordinary achievement for peoples who have come from every part of God's earth.
My own forebears are almost 100 per cent convict. We didn't make it to Port Arthur but obviously came from straitened circumstances when they landed here. And if we reflect on the convict history of Australia, whether it is at Sydney Cover or Port Arthur or our other convict settlements around the country, these were harsh and bleak times. Harsh and bleak times also for indigenous Australians. Harsh and bleak times for those who tried to craft the continent out of the bare earth.
But it says something about the resilience of Australians that we did it. We came through this; we built this great nation which is the envy of the world.
There is a tolerance and a decency about this country which we rarely find in other parts of the world. There is a strength, there is an individualism, there is a determination, there is a character about this country which is something of which we should be collectively proud.
We don't simply rely upon others to do things for us; we get out there and do things for ourselves. But at the same time, alive in our hearts and alive in our history, alive in our personality as a people is also this character on which says, ‘if my neighbour is in strife, let me do something to help my neighbour'.
In other words what we call giving every person a fair go. Giving everyone a hand up. Helping when our fellow Australians are in need.
David said before and he is right, that as we embark upon this year 2009, we're embarking upon what may be one of the most troubled years of our age.
As we look around the world and we the unfolding events of the global economic crisis, these are grave, these are broad, these are deep forces. The crisis which began in the mortgage markets of America, which now have spread to every economy, every society and virtually every community across the world.
And this will test us. Every one of us. It will test governments, national and state. It will test our businesses, it will test our unions, it will test our communities, it will test our basic sense of solidarity.
So that when someone loses their job - and they have, and they will - our job is not just to, our responsibility is not just to see that person as a statistic. Our responsibility is to reach out and help. At the level of Government, at the level of community and at the level of being someone's neighbour.
That's what being Australian is about. The job we have as a nation, as we confront this global economic crisis in a nutshell is this. As the private economy goes through a period of contraction and withdrawal across the world, the job of Government is to do everything humanly possible to fill that gap, to fill that space, in the economic activity of our nation. That is the challenge.
You see in recent times the private economy has not been served well by the unregulated nature of global financial markets. You had extreme capitalism, you had market fundamentalism and we had extreme greed and excess.
And we've seen what has happened with all of that as it's washed down from Wall Street in the United States across the entire globe. And it's an ugly thing to see. It's a very ugly thing to see.
So Governments' charge and challenge is to step into the breach and that is the charge and challenge we have as leaders of Government. This will not be easy. It will not be easy for anybody.
But as we reflect on the challenges we face and the concerns and the anxiety and the fear which people experience and feel right now, let us equally reflect on the course of actions that will see Australia through.
Let us equally reflect on the strengths we have as an economy, as a community, as a society, as a nation. Because our reality today is made up of all these things, there are things that are going wrong.
I intend to be on this day as I have been last year and throughout the year ahead, upfront and direct with the Australian people about how difficult the challenges will be but equally upfront and direct about the course of action that we intend to prosecute as a Government, to see this nation through. And we will.
One part of that challenge is this. How do you stabilise credit markets? Our actions to provide guarantees for bank deposits, our actions to guarantee inter-bank lending of our principal banks, so that they have sufficient flow of credit themselves to on-lend to Australian businesses.
It has been and remains a core part of the challenge to unblock the flow of the blood through the arteries of the economy and that is the provision of credit. And we have more to do.
But also to looks at the rules that govern financial markets for the future and to change them and to say that the days of casino capitalism have gone. We need to have a decent set of rules for the future so that this sort of crisis is not visited on people again. That's the second part of our strategy.
And the third is this. Through the agency of Government and what we do to provide a helping hand to families who need it and to invest in the infrastructure that we need as a nation for the 21st century to step into the breach.
We've begun that. From last year to now the national Government has announced some $36 billion worth of additional measures. $36 billion worth of additional measures.
A $10.4 billion stimulus package, a $6 billion new car plan, a $5 billion infrastructure plan for roads, for infrastructure, for rail and for our universities and for our TAFEs. And a $15 billion new partnership of additional investment with the States, to invest in our teachers, to invest in our nurses, to invest in other critical service areas. $300 million direct investment to our local authorities to assist them in doing the job which they have been elected as well.
I say to you as my fellow Australians, this is the beginning. We have more to do.
There are two courses of action, you know, available at a time like this. For Government to stand to one side as the free market fundamentalists would have us believe and wash our hands and say ‘not for me, don't have a job to do, let the market sort it out'.
There is another approach which says that active Government is the way through this. It won't be easy, it will be ugly from time to time. But we have a course of action to see Australia through.
That is made more possible be an extraordinary event we witnessed yesterday. The inauguration of Barack Obama as the 44th President of the United States. What an extraordinary event for the world.
But with Barack Obama's election we also see this, the rebirth of American global leadership.
Because what we do in Australia for us and our economy and our communities and the challenge of joblessness which is there, staring us in the face, what we do as a Government and as a community is important. It is critical. It is stepping into the breach.
But unless that is harnessed by the combined agency of Governments around the world, then we cannot finally prevail. And that's where this new American President and his message of hope for the global economy and the global community is of such strong resonance and importance to us all.
I look forward to working with this President. America's global leadership is now more important than it has been for a generation and more. And with him in the White House, understanding full well the depths of the challenge which he has inherited and understanding that this is not just a challenge of the American domestic economy but a challenge which as a consequence of failures in the American economy is now for us a challenge for the economy of the world..
I have confidence that in him we're going to have leadership, policy and execution which will enable the world to come through this crisis as well.
So times will be tough, challenges ahead but my message also to each of you here today as we begin to think about the celebration of our National Day, is this. Be mindful of the pressures we face, be mindful of the strengths we have but beyond all that never ever allow our spirits to be crushed.
Confidence in ourselves, confidence in our community, confidence in our State, confidence in our nation, confidence in our businesses, this is critical to preserve. As important for the future as the objective things which governments themselves do.
So David, thanks for having me here to your barbie. Thanks for having me here at your archaeological site for your barbie. Thank you for all the proud mums and dads of these new additions to your fair State. Each of them one and all prospective taxpayers. So look after them mate. Nurture them well.
But I say to you all as members of the great Tasmanian family and therefore members of the Great Australian family, let's go forth with confidence this year, weather the challenges together because we are all in this together.


Can I say first of all that one of the great things about our anticipation of Australia Day is a reflection of the contribution of indigenous Australia, to Australia's past and to Australia's future. So I begin by acknowledging the first Australians whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history. 
Reflect on that fact; the oldest continuing cultures in human history. When I mention that or it is mentioned to me by heads of Government and heads of State from around the world, it causes a moment of reflection and awe that we in this country are so privileged as to have among us those who represent the deepest link to antiquity. And our future.
It's great to be back at Government House. I remember coming here the first time as the slightly acneous private secretary of the then Leader of the Opposition Wayne Goss. Wayne I think is here with us this evening. And that was as he was about to go through that magical transformational moment of becoming, from Leader of the Opposition to becoming Premier of Queensland. And always being a publicity hound myself, the official photograph has me doing this [leans into shot] in the background as a mere private secretary. I still have it in my office in Canberra.
It's great to be back. I've been here a few times since.
As I reflect on the extraordinary history of this State of Queensland, it has been an extraordinary transformation. Your Excellency, I have never been able to successfully, repeatedly pronounce the word sesquicentenary; so I'm not going to. 150 years is a good innings.
And think back on those 150 years. This is where the briefing papers of the Commonwealth constantly are different from those of the States. My briefing paper says that when this colony was separated from the colony of NSW, in fact the public coffers stood at ninepence, not seven pence ha'penny.
As Sir Leo Hielscher will recognise, there is a continuity to this theme. Queensland under-Treasurers always understating the case when it comes to the actual case of Queensland finances as they make representations to the Commonwealth. Or in those days to the Crown.
But those 150 years have been just extraordinary. The events of 1859, the small band of dedicated souls who assembled at the Botanic Gardens to greet the Governor-elect, or the Governor-appointed, and Lady Diamantina Bowen. And from those extraordinary humble beginnings to fashion this great State. It's a remarkable achievement.
If you travel around the world and see what has happened with the evolution of democracies and economies and communities and societies across the world, these have been fashioned and shaped not just over a century or two but have been fashioned over the millennia. It has not been the case here.
This State, this great part of Australia was fashioned from the soil. There was nothing. And in so doing, this great contribution to Australia has been brought 150 years later.
One of the great contributions of Queensland is not as it once did, constantly celebrate how different it was to the rest of Australia. The great contribution and transformation of Queensland has been now this  -  to say how much it contributes to the rest of Australia. And it does. In every field of endeavour.
Whether it is through the appointment of Her Excellency the Governor General Quentin Bryce, who is performing an extraordinary function as the first woman in the history of the Commonwealth to occupy that position, or whether it is through the contribution of extraordinary Premiers, like the one you are blessed to have in this State - Anna Bligh.
Or whether in the field of business or the professions or in medical research, the extraordinary contributions that are now made from Brisbane and the rest of the State to the country at large. These are good contributions indeed.
And they bespeak, I believe, a sense of quiet assurance and confidence about our part in this great Federation called Australia. And that is good. And we have much to contribute. Although I keep have to wondering, wonder to myself if I can continue to say ‘we' because those south of a particular river, wonder who I am speaking for when I say ‘we'.
As they say you can take the boy out of Queensland but you can't take the Queensland out of the boy.
Australia Day. The Federation and its future. The history of this Commonwealth is one of equally remarkable achievement. To think that those who came up with this idea of founding a nation and to fashion a nation for a continent and a continent for a nation. The Federation dream, the Federation vision. And barely a century later to have turned this into the modern reality we celebrate as Australia.
This too is an extraordinary achievement. An extraordinary achievement of all States of the federation and those who have crafted the federal vision and turned it into a national reality. But if you go to its core, beyond the achievements of politicians, beyond the achievements of those in business, beyond the achievements of those who have been formally charged with the administration of justice and the laws of the Commonwealth, what has actually caused this country to come into its own are deep qualities of our people. Deep qualities of a type referred to by Anna just before.
What are those qualities? They're qualities of extraordinary resilience. Extraordinary resilience. A capacity to actually confront obstacles and to see a way through and to emerge from those obstacles and those challenges stronger and more determined.
Resilience, also courage. Recently in Canberra we had the opportunity to honour a recipient, a new recipient of the Victoria Cross; the highest order for gallantry in this country. As I signed off the letter to Her Excellency the Governor General to be passed to the Queen to approve that Honour, I read the citation of this young man and what he had achieved in the fields of combat and the mountains of Afghanistan.
And if any of you ever doubt or question what quaint concepts, as described by some, are these words courage, valour and gallantry  -  read this young man's citation. It is the stuff of heroes.
But he also reflects a value deeply embedded in this Australian soul as well and that is a value, the value that we've seen writ large in our men and women in uniform over so many fields of conflict, over so many decades, back to the engagements at Gallipoli.
But courage more broadly as well. Those of you in the medical and caring professions deal with courage with the tragedy and the adversity with which people are confronted. Of a dying child, of a relative who is afflicted sadly. And the courage of those who care and the courage of families who support says something deep and great about the values which are writ large in the heart of our nation.
Which leads me to the third of those qualities and that is compassion. Compassion is not the sign of weakness, compassion is I believe is a sign of greater strength. Because it has about it a sense and quality that says ‘when I see someone in need my response is automatically one of immediate empathy and identity and as a consequence of that  -  action'.
We call it different things in Australia. Some call it the fair go, some call it looking after your mates, some call it making sure that everyone gets a fair shake of the sauce bottle. But you know what it's about? It's about looking after people and regarding a fundamental Australian value is this, that it's not just how I look after myself by how I in fact care for others.
And those are great Australian qualities. Whether people are of faith or not of faith, it is a deep, I believe, Australian value. Writ large in our history but also to guide us for our future.
Resilience, courage, compassion, care for others. The Premier has made mention - as I have in recent days as I've travelled across the country and I travel to Perth tomorrow - one of the great challenges we face with this global financial crisis, which has become an economic crisis, which has become and employment crisis, affecting the jobs and lives of working Australians and working peoples across the world.
Those affected by this crisis did not cause it. The causes of this crisis lie beyond our sores and regrettably the causes of this crisis lie in qualities we would not wish to speak much of. Qualities of greed, qualities of unrestrained greed.
But our job as a community, as a nation, is now to attend to the problem which we have been given and in so doing deploy the qualities of resilience, of courage and of looking after one another.
The Government is determined to chart a course through this time of crisis. We'll do so by acting to support the stability of the financial system. We'll do so by acting to support the continued supply of credit to the Australian economy. We will do so by actively taking the resources of Government and seeking to fill that gap which is left by the problems now caused within the private economy.
And through the demand and the investment of Government and the critical things we need for our future  -  our roads, our ports, our bridges, our railways, the needs of broadband, the needs of new communications technology, our new hospitals, our new universities, our TAFEs, our schools  -  to lay out a greater investment than would otherwise be the case called upon by Government at a time like this, to fill that gap.
That's the task of Government. We're embarked on that task, we'll be resolute in its execution but much lies ahead.
That is one half of the battle. The other half lies with each of us as human beings, each of us as members of our community, each of us as members of families, each of us deploying those other qualities of which I spoke before.
That is, when we see our neighbours, we see our friends and we see others doing it tough through these times, we actually extend out the hand to help. We do that without complaint, we do that as a sense of duty, of obligation and just doing the right thing.
We've done this in times past, we're going to be called upon it to do it again. But these values which guide the direction which the Government I lead, which guide also I believe the heartbeat of the nations it seeks to deal with the damage of these extraordinary damage being wrought by this extraordinary set of events, will see Australia through.
And this State, Queensland, will help see the nation through.
Thank you for your kindness in greeting me back home. It is good to be among you. Being home is part of being in Queensland and I've got to say this is a great State and Therese and I are so blessed to be here with you tonight.
Happy Australia Day. 


The difference between Cottesloe Beach and Sunshine Coast, Sunshine Beach where I grew up is that, we don't really have any stingers there either, at least not many. We deploy them purely on unwelcome foreign tourists. There is a difference between the stinger concentration along the Queensland coast - that's a matter for subsequent discussion. 
Your beaches here are just extraordinary. Even I as a Queenslander have wandered along Cottesloe before and you are blessed with a beautiful natural environment here and this is truly a blessed part of God's earth.
As Prime Minister I am doing something a little different this year. In previous years, in previous decades, my predecessors of whichever political persuasion have usually and properly focused on national day celebrations in the nation's Capital. And they will occur as they should on the 26th of January in Canberra.
The nation is much bigger than Canberra. The nation extends - at least at my last report - beyond the boundaries of the Australian Capital Territory. This is a vast nation.
And what I have sought to do this week is to take some time to travel to each of our State capitals, beginning in Sydney, then to Adelaide, to Melbourne, last night to Brisbane and to here today. And back to Canberra this evening.
And the purpose is simply this, to be among the people of the nation and its leaders to reflect together across all the great diversity of this great country Australia on our achievements past and our aspirations for the future. And it is a good thing for all of our national political leaders to be with the nation's people out across this vast land.
Australia Day of course means many things. It's a day when we celebrate our achievements, our experiences and the values that we share as Australians. It's a day in which we share stories about those achievements, experiences and values as well. Stories from our past, stories from the present and hopeful stories for the future. Stories about the building of the nation, sometimes in periods of great hardship, about the forging of one people from nearly all the peoples of the world, forging a continent and a nation. Forging a nation for a continent and a continent for a nation. An extraordinary achievement.
Also, a time to reflect on the stories of indigenous Australians. Their ancient but still evolving art, their unique understanding of the land, their contribution deep and spiritual to Australia's emerging identity.
Australia Day is also a day on which we honour heroes, people who have shown outstanding leadership across the country, in education and health and business, sport, the arts and so many different fields. Australians who inspire us, particularly in terms of what can be done in the face of adversity. Through their example we see the best of what we are as a nation and who we are as a people.
But this year Australia Day has come at a time, a hard time, in our country's history. This year the celebration of Australia Day is mixed with the concern, the anxiety and the fear that is felt from the global financial crisis and economic crisis which now affects all nations across the world, including this nation, Australia.
Throughout the past year I said that 2009 was going to be a tough year and so it has come to pass. The news from around the world has not been good, nor has it been good here in Australia.
On Wednesday BHP announced it would cut more than 3,000 jobs in Australia. A large number of those jobs cut here in Western Australia. Communities like Ravensthorpe, Hopetoun. 1,800 jobs, three to four hundred immediate local jobs.
This is where the statistics of the impact of this thing called the global financial crisis translate into the lives of living Australians and the challenges they face for the future.
This is not just a crisis of nations and economies, it is one which affects real, living human beings, their lives, their families and how they seek to shape their way through it.
Also, this week we've seen new growth figures from China. We've seen a reduction in China's growth performance this last quarter and we understand the impact which then has for Australia. China, to remind everyone here present, absorbs more than 15 per cent of Australian exports. 15 per cent.
Their falling growth, which amounts to about a $200 billion reduction in Chinese output, translates into $5 billion worth of lost exports for Australia, which in turn has a massive impact on Australian exports and Australian jobs.
These announcements are of deep and immediate concern here in Western Australia as they are for the nation as a whole. The magnitude of this global financial and economic crisis is underscored by a few simple, stark facts. Let me just give you four of them.
The United States lost three million jobs last year, the biggest loss in a year since World War II. Second, the global share markets have lost half their value since they peaked in October 2007. The greatest single fall since the Great Depression. Third, last year the value of the Australian stock market fell by 43 per cent, the biggest fall in a year since 1900. And now the International Monetary Fund predicts that advanced economies will contract this year by 0.25 per cent for the first time since World War II.
These sharp and stark statistics underpin the global dimensions of that which we all face and which therefore Australia faces as well.
An unprecedented crisis demands and requires an unprecedented response. That is why the Government has moved swiftly and decisively to guarantee all bank deposits, to underpin stability in the banking system. Unprecedented in the history of the Commonwealth.
That is why the Government has moved decisively to guarantee the borrowings of our private financial institutions on global markets. Again, unprecedented in the Commonwealth's history.
That is why the Commonwealth has now invested in the last several months, $36 billion to stimulate the economy, sustain confidence and support jobs, and through our investments - $5 billion in infrastructure and local government projects and through our commitment to more than 700,000 new training places - laying the ground for a stronger, more resilient economy that will emerge from the crisis and position Australia well for the future.
Our challenge as a Government is to chart a course of strategy through this crisis. We've embarked upon that strategy, our resolve is to prosecute it and to prosecute it to the full.
There are two options available for governments in dealing with the crisis. One is do nothing and hope that it all sorts itself out in the end; that markets automatically self-stabilise. And that is what some of the market fundamentalists would have us believe.
Or the other. To act decisively through the agency of Government to seek to step into the breach where the private economy has begun to falter.
The Government I lead has decided to embark upon that second course of action. And that is our resolve and we do so without apology.
And today I would confirm a further step which the Government has taken. An again unprecedented response to the global financial crisis. And that is to intervene directly in order to support the flow of private credit to good Australian businesses and the jobs which they provide.
As I've said before, to ensure that Australian banks have funds to lend, the Government took a historic decision on October 12 to guarantee term wholesale funding for regulated banks by the Australian Prudential Regulatory Authority and building societies and credit unions.
In addition the Government as a course, as I said before, acted to guarantee all deposits.
The Government's action has helped to soothe financial markets but here is the important point, before the guarantee Australian banks were finding it increasingly difficult to raise funds off shore.
In September last year their raisings had fallen to $1.7 billion, down from more than $13 billion they averaged each month earlier in the year. Then in October offshore markets dried up almost all together and Australian banks raised no money at all. In this climate the guarantee provided by the sovereign Government of Australia had an immediate effect.
In December offshore raising was $15.4 billion, the highest in the past few years and this was all guaranteed funding by Government. In January 2009 this amount has already reached $19.8 billion, again all guaranteed by Government.
These are extraordinary measures for extraordinary times. An unprecedented crisis demanding an unprecedented response.
Our banks are strong and well capitalised and the guarantee has enabled them to raise the funds they need to lend to Australian businesses. But the Australian economy is global in nature and therefore affected by the health of foreign banks as well as Australian banks.
Some cash-strapped foreign banks are scaling back their lending in foreign markets and that includes Australia. If banks do not allow clients to refinance as they would in normal conditions then companies can be forced to sell assets, often at low value. This endangers their financial health and that of the whole economy.
According to Merrill Lynch, lending by overseas banks represents more than half of the $285 billion in syndicated loans that have been issued to Australian businesses since 2006. Of those outstanding loans $75 billion are scheduled to fall due over the next two years.
If foreign banks do not roll over their share of these loans, it will be difficult for Australia's four major banks to fill the gap on their own. The mathematics is fairly straightforward.
A significant share of this is in the commercial property sector. Foreign banks have more than $45 billion in exposure to Australian commercial property, around 28 per cent of total bank lending to the sector. And supply of credit affects real businesses and affects real jobs in this sector.
As the global financial crisis affects banks around the world, some banks, foreign banks are seeking to reduce their exposures. That is why today the Government confirms that it will establish a $4 billion Australian Business Investment Partnership with the four major Australian banks.
This $4 billion partnership is a temporary contingency measure to provide liquidity support to viable, major commercial property projects in Australia. This is an initial $4 billion and could be extended via the issuance of Government guaranteed debt to create up to $30 billion of loanable capital.
And its purpose is this  -  to help fill the gap left by any possible withdrawal of foreign banks from Australian businesses and therefore from Australian jobs.
Again, extraordinary measures for extraordinary times.
The alternative is to do nothing. The Government that I lead will not embark upon that course of action.
The partnership I've described will support the commercial property assets of viable Australian businesses which without financing would be forced to retrench thousands of workers. Commercial property projects that could be supported by this initiative include shopping centres, office towers and factories under construction. As well as existing properties of that nature.
The commercial property sector itself employs about 150,000 people in Australia. Many of the 150,000 workers employed in the commercial property sector are tradespeople, plumbers, electricians, carpenters.
Without action, a combination of weak demand brought about by the global financial crisis and tight credit conditions brought about the global financial crisis could see up to 50,000 people in this sector lose their jobs, according to Treasury. With flow on effects to jobs in other parts of the economy.
Small and medium sized businesses which service the commercial property sector could also be devastated by weak demand and tight credit conditions in the sector. This Government will not sit idly by and watch these jobs and small and medium sized businesses be wiped out by fluctuations in global credit markets.
Instead we have resolved to act.
The partnership I've described will be structured to minimise the exposure of risk to Australian tax payers. And any risk is equally shared between Government and the four major banks. The alternative is to do nothing and to simply carp from the sidelines while Australian businesses and jobs are sacrificed to the global financial crisis.
This Government will not do that. This Government will act.
As we approach Australia Day and the period ahead, the challenge ahead is not simply that of governments and what governments do. The responsibility of Government is to chart a course for the nation not just in good times but in hard times and to help steer the nation through and this Government is so resolved. But that is part of it.
The other part is to recognise this core principle. We are all in this together. Every State of the nation. Every community across the nation. Business leaders, union leaders, community leaders, governments at all levels, national, state and local. Working together based on one simple and single recognition  -  we are all in this together.
Australia did not cause this crisis. The crisis began elsewhere. And the product of values on which we should reflect in due season. But we are dealt now a practical challenge and a challenge which we must meet together. All of us, working together.
My resolve is to do so in partnership with the Government of Western Australia, in partnership with businesses here in Western Australia, in partnership with local communities here in Western Australia.
The shape which this takes over time, we will see and we will work through each of the challenges which emerges and in partnership with governments across the country.
But what governments do is one thing. What you the community do is something else.
This is a time which calls forth fundamental Australian values. Values of courage, values of resilience and values of compassion. Looking out for one another. So that when we see somebody who has been affected by this crisis by losing their job, whose lives have been thrown into turmoil, who then must move from one community to another, the kids' schooling being upset as a result, that our response as human beings and as neighbours and as members of the community is to reach out a hand of friendship and support.
If we do this together, government, business, unions, the community, those individual Australians, calling forth the great values which have shaped Australia over so many decades, then we can together see Australia through the crisis which lies ahead of us.
For me it's a great honour to be among you here today in Western Australia to celebrate this Australia Day. This State is known for its vitality, this State is known for its optimism, this State is known for its determination and its can-do attitude.
All those values and virtues are going to be needed by the nation in the year which lies ahead. I am confident in the nation's future, I am confident in this great State's future.
I wish you all a very happy Australia Day.
[Ends].


To Adam Gilchrist, Chair of the National Australia Day Council, Warren Pearson, National Director of the National Australia Day Council, Australian of the Year finalists, one and all. And where is Aaron Paul? Put your hand up. Aaron Paul, seriously decent bloke. Distinguished Australians, one and all.
I begin by acknowledging the First Australians on whose land we meet and whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
Australia Day.
First of all, on behalf of Therese and myself, welcome to our home. It's an honour to have you with us this morning. And that's not a statement of politeness. It's not that. It's that having spent a little time speaking with each of as you've come in the door and to be reminded of who we are privileged to have among us today.
Each of you are leaders within your communities and therefore leaders across the nation. And you're not here for idle purpose, you're not here for random reasons. You're here because of the things that you have done, and because of the things that you will do and that's a good thing.
Leadership is really important and each of you in your own spheres have demonstrated those qualities of leadership which begin with one core and enduring quality, and that is service.
As I look through the extraordinary array of talent we have here, we have town leaders, community leaders who've bridged the gap between cultural and ethnic divides. We have sea rescuers, we have wildlife rescuers. We have businessmen, philanthropists, we have band leaders, those engaged in the campaign against childhood obesity.
Founders of youth charities, Paralympians, victim support workers, indigenous sports heroes, indigenous leaders, advocates and representatives of the stolen generations. Sporting legends. We also have motivational speakers who assist with those who are doing it tough. Sporting legends also who have now chosen to make a difference when it comes to the great fight against cancer.
We have also young writers and artists, scientists, medical specialists. We have literacy advocates, revolutionary school principals, church leaders and leaders in their local communities.
And then we have Peter Cundall. Yes, you. Gardening expert extraordinaire. Whose first line as he walked into The Lodge this morning was ‘what a waste of lawn'. His second great remark to us all was ‘I'd turn that into a potato patch'. So Cundall, whatever happens for the rest of the day, you're now on informal, unpaid commission. Therese will be in contact, smarten up and get your ideas ready.
None however could beat the extraordinary greeting I had this morning from Sam Cawthorn, if you've met Sam it's a unique experience. He's the bloke who knows the serious meaning of a firm handshake. As he leaves his hand in your hand.
He has an artificial hand. It's more than a party trick, let me tell you it takes your breath away. I met Sam the other morning in Hobart, his, he's told me this morning that his little girl, his little daughter provided him with an Australia Day dare to do that to the Prime Minister. What's your daughter's name?
CAWTHORN INTERJECTS: Emilia.
Emilia. Mission accomplished. I am still recovering and still in therapy.
This is going to be a great day and tomorrow will be an even greater day. It's great because it's a time when we acknowledge not just the ties that bind and form this nation Australia, not just acknowledge the wonder of the achievement of bringing about a nation for a continent and a continent for a nation and achieving such extraordinary unity under such extraordinary diversity.
It's all those things and each is important. But in terms of this event it's about honouring leadership and achievement. As I said at the beginning these things are not lightly considered nor are they lightly given. So however things turn out, know this from me as your Prime Minister: I admire and respect deeply what each of you has done and what each of you will do.
Equally I admire the achievements of our former Australians of the year. We have one slightly famous country and western singer  -  where is he? Oh there he is up there, bloke in the funny hat. Not you Dodson. D1, D2  -  B1, B2.
But thank you for your work this year. It has been a good voice for rural Australia in what has been a hard time for the bush.
As I conclude these remarks and they are purely remarks of welcome for what will be a couple of days of great celebration in the nation's capital - let's hold fast to this core truth about Australia and where we are in our current national voyage.
And it's the truth which has been with us for centuries past, sometimes better and in greater strength than others, but certainly with us today. And that is whatever challenges lie ahead for us this year and lie ahead for us in the century ahead, we are all in this together. Every one of us, wherever we have come from.
Businessmen, union leaders, indigenous leaders, other community leaders, those who are town mayors, shire presidents in the farthest outback, in the bush, our State governments, our national government, our cabinets, our church and community organisations. Those who are out there at the forefront of the medical and caring professions, those who are out there at the pioneering edges of science and innovation, those of you who are out there pushing the boundaries in terms of literary and creative endeavour.
And the challenges which lie ahead in the great admixture which equals this nation Australia, your talents in the year ahead will be called forth as community leaders. Many of us in this nation will need encouragement which as community leaders you are perfectly positioned to provide that.
In a much more difficult time in our history, one former resident of this grand old house, John Curtin, had this to say. The people of the nation are the 'strength of the nation'. The people of the nation are the strength of the nation.
Here we have leaders of the people, each and every one of you, and in you lies our strength this year as we the nation will prevail.
A very happy Australia Day.


I don't think I need to say Happy Australia Day. You seem very happy already.
Can I say this to Australians one and all? Let's acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet and whose cultures we honour and celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
Think about that for just a moment, the oldest continuing cultures in human history. Our deep link with deep antiquity and we uniquely in Australia have the opportunity to share that heritage with our Aboriginal brothers and sisters. What a great privilege it is for all Australians.
I was told recently that in the traditional welcome to country in many parts of the country, the welcome translates a bit like this. The welcome says: ‘we offer you the fruits of our land for all that you need to live. The food, the water, the berries; all that you need to live.' We have much to learn from that intrinsic spirit of generosity and welcome.
As a kid growing up in a country town in Australia, I remember in that small country town of one or two hundred people, a similar spirit of generosity when people came to the town for the first time or when some left. That spirit was there which said ‘what's ours is yours because you're part of our community'.
And you know something? It's drawing on that great spirit and those great qualities, those great Australian qualities which we will need all to draw on in the year ahead.
These deep Australian qualities, qualities of courage, qualities of resilience and qualities of compassion. These are great Australian values and you see them writ large in Australian heroes past, Australian heroes today and those of tomorrow.
We see them in our volunteers, those out there fighting fires as we speak. We see them in our troops in the field in Afghanistan, standing in the line of duty. We see it in those who staff our hospitals and care for the sick and the dying. These are great Australian values.
And we see them also writ large in the lives of those whom we will honour in just a moment. Those who've become finalists in this great Australian of the Year contest.
In the year ahead my message is simple. It will be tough but if we as a country draw deep and extend out the hand of support and friendship to those who need it, then we as Australians and as a nation will come through.
To all of you gathered here in the nation's capital, to all of you participating in the great celebration that is Australia Day, can I say this? This great nation recognises that we are all in this together.
The challenges which lie ahead, we are all in this together.
Businesses, unions, indigenous Australians, non-indigenous Australians, those from diverse communities, governments at all levels, federal, State and local. Whatever the world throws at us in this year ahead remember this core truth. We are all in this together. And together we will come through this year more resilient than we have been even in the past.
Happy Australia Day.


As we celebrate Australia Day with our friends and families - over barbeques, picnic tables and beach towels - I know that many of you share my concerns about the impact of the global financial crisis on our families.
This year will not be an easy one, and to be frank, we face some very big challenges.
But I am confident that, if we all pull together, we can come through this together - and come out even stronger and emerge from this crisis even more resilient than before.
Australia is better placed then almost every other nation to deal with the global financial crisis, but it's going to be tough.
Our history as a nation is one of resilience - to confront obstacles and see a way through, to emerge stronger and more determined.
From the struggle of Indigenous Australians for recognition and respect;
From the courage of our diggers in Gallipoli, 
on the Western Front, at Kokoda, 
in Timor Leste and 
in Afghanistan;
From the determination of miners on the goldfields, of women for the right to vote and of workers for a fair go at work.
This is not an ordinary nation... This is an extraordinary nation.
Resilient, courageous, and purposeful, without sacrificing compassion.
In 2009 we will be calling on all those great Australian qualities because we are all in this together.
The Government stands ready to do whatever is necessary to support the stability of our financial institutions at a time when others around the world are under threat; to support the economy during a global economic recession; and to create new jobs through government investment as other jobs in the private sector come under pressure
Our shared history as Australians shows that together, we can meet the challenges the world might throw at us in 2009.
I wish you a very happy Australia Day.
You can view the video of the Prime Minister's Australia Day message in the media hub. 


Thank you Terry for that challenge. I've always been lousy on the didge. But I'm up for a tutorial.
Distinguished Australians one and all. And I begin by acknowledging the First Australians on whose land we meet and whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
Reflect on that fact for a moment on this our national day. That we are privileged to have among us these cultures who link this nation with deepest antiquity, unique across the world, unique across the world, in the dance, in the music, in the beautiful paintings we find etched in the caves of the Kimberley and beyond. Paintings more ancient than those we read about in our history books, in ancient Spain and ancient France. Indeed the deepest reach to our deepest past. And we are so privileged as a people and as a nation to share this continent with these great cultures.
On this Australia Day, what are the values that have shaped this vast land into the great nation that it has become? I believe there are three  -  courage, resilience and compassion. Courage, knowing the dangers that lie ahead on the road, but defying those dangers and taking the decision to proceed. Resilience, when the road becomes hard and the comforts scarce, staying the course until the journey's end. Compassion, when we extend an outstretched hand to those who fall by the road, who stumble or who are injured, and to help see them through as seeing them through is seeing all of us through. Mateship, a fair go, a fair go for all.
These great values have enlivened our national soul for more than a century. They have shaped our past, they steel us for the present, and they secure our future. They are part of our nation's moral compass, they are part of our nation's moral purpose. We see these great values etched deep in our pioneers, in our farmers, in those who have championed women's suffrage, those who have fought in the mud and the blood of the Somme, those who forged the spirit of Kokoda. Courage, resilience and compassion.
We see them at work across our nation today. The army of volunteers who literally are the lifeblood of every local community across our nation. Those who care for the sick and for the dying, without commendation, without public recognition, but because it is the right, humane and human thing to do. And those who we see today still proudly wearing the uniform of Australia in foreign lands. The amazing story of Trooper Donaldson VC, a hero writ large for our nation today. Once again courage, resilience and compassion.
Values that have shaped our past that steel ourselves for the present, values that will secure our future. Values on which we will now need to draw deeply as we confront the great challenges of the year that lies ahead, replete with its uncertainties. Challenges from crises beyond our shores.
This great global crisis is not of Australia's making, but as Australians we are left to deal with it. And deal with it we will. The causes of this crisis are complex. But ultimately they go to a set of values that are the very antithesis of our own. Values of unrestrained greed, encouraged by an ideology of unfettered markets. Nothing of courage and certainly nothing of concern or compassion for others, or the consequences of their actions.
But now we face the living consequences here at home of this unrestrained greed abroad. And those consequences are not statistics, they are the jobs, they are the lives, they are the families of working Australians across our nation. From the south west tip of Western Australia, to the Bowen Basin in Queensland, and as the year unfolds, most points in between as the rising tide of unemployment that last year inundated America and Europe and China now laps on our shores as well.
Our challenge as a Government is to steer Australia through. It will be hard. There will be setbacks. But of this I am absolutely persuaded, that steeled by the values of our past and guided by the policy we have set and supported by a community engaged by the needs of our neighbours, we will prevail. As a nation, we will come through this crisis. We will come through this crisis more resilient than we were even before.
Courage, resilience, compassion. Three great values that anchored in the realisation of a fourth, and that is that we are all in this together. We are all in this together. Business, unions, bosses, workers, government, the community, governments federal, state and local. Those who have come to this land 200 years ago, those who are welcomed into the nation's family today. Indigenous Australians, non-Indigenous Australians. We are all in this together.
To our Indigenous leaders, and those who call for a change to our national day, let me say a simple, respectful, but straightforward no.
We are a free country and it is natural and right from time to time, that there will be conversations about such important symbols for our nation. It is equally right as a free country that those of us charged with political leadership provide a straightforward response.
There is much controversy in many lands about national days. Examine the history of France, of Spain, of Italy, of Germany, of the United States. The Declaration of Independence at a time when one third of the American colonists supported the British Crown. There've always been controversies about national days.
But this is not the point. The central point is what we then resolve to fashion as a nation? That is the central point. And whether the nation we fashioned through our resolve, our energies and our efforts is a nation which includes all, not just some. And that is why I support this, our national day. Because in Australia, we have resolved to build such a nation. A nation for Australians all, not just for Australians some.
A nation which has apologised for the mistakes of the past, and there have been many. But a nation now resolved to close the gap. A nation now resolved to close the gap in education, in health, and employment, and those things which matter in people's daily and practical lives. A nation of Australians all. Not just of some. So let us embrace this great practical challenge which lies ahead in closing the gap. Embraced and supported by the goodwill of all Australians, to get behind this great project, so that the gap that exists between us in the life opportunities which present themselves can be closed.
To those of you who join us today as members of the Australian family for the first time, can I say welcome. Welcome to the nation's family. When citizenship was introduced by Ben Chifley 60 years ago, it was to reflect this great wave of migration which came to our shores after the last world war. And Chifley and those who worked with him said among themselves, let us embrace formally this construction of the new Australian nation. No longer British subjects past, but Australian citizens future.
And today you join their ranks. And as Prime Minister of Australia I am so glad that you are doing so, because you bring with you dynamism, you bring with you determination, and you bring with you diversity.
The great spirit of Australia has been this - to fashion unity from diversity. And to do so through tolerance and respect, and through the energisation of the nation. And that is what your joining us today does for the year ahead and for the future.
As we have done throughout our national history, resolving afresh to fashion a nation for a continent, and a continent for a nation, and you our newest members. The values on which this nation has been built and which will guide us for the future  -  courage, resilience, compassion, and to add that fourth to realise that we are all in this together. And shaped with these great values that have guided us so well in the past, let us proceed with absolute confidence, with absolute confidence to embrace the challenges that now face us for the future.
A happy Australia Day to you all.


Can I acknowledge the President of ACT Cricket, also James Southerland, CEO Cricket Australia. Heather Ridell, Acting High Commissioner of New Zealand. Where are you Heather? You're lurking here somewhere I know. There you are. I see you.
I see lurking in the distance the Deputy Prime Minister of Australia and I'll come to her in a minute. Ambassadors, High Commissioners, those from the diplomatic core who love and to support this great game of cricket.
Chief of the Defence Force, Air Chief Marshall Angus Houston. Where are you Angus? What's this got to do with the defence of Australia more to the point? Absolutely nothing is the answer to that. Mind you if I was you I'd be going to the cricket too.
And Andrew Barr, Minister for Sport in the ACT and can I acknowledge also members of the 1948 Invincibles. Arthur Morris, Neil Harvey and Sam Loxton. Every time I meet these guys I still sort of draw a deep breath at the thought of here I am dealing with members of the Immortals and their great contact with that great side of that great year and it is an honour to have you among us.
ACT cricket officials, members of the New Zealand team, great to have you here. Members of the Prime Minister's XI, even better to have you here. Umpires who've already been given their instructions by me, to be fair, impartial and Australian. Sponsors one and all. And of course the two captains of the two sides.
And I begin by acknowledging the First Australians on whose land we meet and whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
It gives me great pleasure to welcome the New Zealand Cricket Team, the Prime Minister's XI, Cricket Australia and the ACT Cricket Community to Canberra once again for the Prime Minister's XI match.
The PM's XI has become one of the most notable days on the Australian cricketing calendar, and it's wonderful to see New Zealand here to take on this challenge for
the fourth time.
The history of this match, first taking place in 1951, serves to reflect Australia's great love of cricket  -  and often that of the cricket tragic of the Australian Prime Minister of the day. And of course 51 takes us back to the great days of Sir Robert Menzies.
For our New Zealand friends less familiar with the history of Sir Robert Menzies who was a long-serving post-war Prime Minister. Ming as he was affectionately known in Australia's great habit was to organise every official visit to the United Kingdom to take in an entire Ashes series.
These days if we're abroad for more than two or three days, the questions are raised as to what you're doing there. Menzies could get away with two or three months and no one would ask why. As he just appeared not just at the test game, not just the test matches, not just at Lords, but at most of the country games as well. We pine for an earlier and more civilised age. Alas it has passed us by.
However, despite the prominent role that we've grown accustomed in recent days, which is fixture there was a time when the game wasn't played for twenty seasons through to the early 1980s. Of course the Arch Deakin of its resurrection was none other than Bob Hawke, cricketer extraordinaire.
We all know that great shot of Bob himself playing cricket. Bob fancied himself as a cricket played of renown and that great shot of him having his glasses removed by fast delivery by members of the press gallery, which reflects their general contempt for the Office of Prime Minister.
One of the stands at Manuka, where we will be playing tomorrow, is named after Bob. And this is very appropriate, as he played no small part in reviving this great tradition.
In Hawkey's first effort overseeing the team in early 1984, a young stocky Tasmanian from Launceston by the name of David Clarence Boon put his name in lights and earned himself a test spot after scoring a run-a-ball 134 in all against the fearsome West Indies attack of that day. And so Boonie's career began.
David Boon would go on to amass 21 test centuries and 7,400 runs for his country in over 100 appearances in the baggy green and is one of its most proud custodians and of course a high celebration of Australian fashion and culture as well. Where's Boonie? Is he here? That's good, I've insulted him in his absence.
It was also the last time that we would be blessed with opportunity to see the great D K Lillee in an Australian XI, who picked up 2/21 leading the attack in a typically effective and economical display.
Australia went on to win that day, a rare victory against ‘the Windies' who were at the time very much at the peak of their powers.
Bob Hawke's Midas touch as a cricket selector I'm sure will surprise few, as has been his way in most areas of his most extraordinary life.
Over the years this match has retained that reputation as a curtain raiser for future stars, and also a most appropriate opportunity to recognise some of Australian cricket's most revered champions.
This year we are privileged to have Justin Langer captain the Australian side, honouring his commitment and enormous contribution to the game. Good on you Justin.
Few Australian cricketers have worn the baggy green with such pride and distinction as Justin. His test debut was a baptism of fire against other, another fearsome West Indian attack in 1993.
Until his retirement in 2007, Justin got every last ounce out of himself, compiling one of the most impressive test records in the modern era.
He played an extraordinary 105 Tests for Australia  -  14 against New Zealand  -  and formed one half of Australia's greatest ever opening partnership with Matthew Hayden. Who came from Queensland. I just thought I'd mention that. So do I.
With 23 test centuries and over 7,600 test runs, Justin's application, passion and dedication to the cause will go down in cricketing folk lore.
It was very appropriate that Justin retired from international, retirement from the international cricketing circuit occurred after Australia regained the Ashes with a five nil whitewash against the old enemy. That's what we describe in politics as social justice. That is a five nil whitewash of the Poms. Is the British High Commissioner here? That's good.
With Justin Langer, it was the team that always came first.
We are honoured that he will once again represent Australia and for the second time in his career, captain the Prime Minister's XI.
It is also great for us to welcome Daniel Vettori and all the Black Caps to our nation's capital before they tour the country in the Chappell/Haddlee series.
Our two countries have met at Manuka Oval on four occasions, with New Zealand claiming victory on all occasions, with the exception of the one match that was abandoned. That's very disturbing when you think about it. Isn't it Justin? No pressure mate.
As is always the case in our traditional trans-Tasman rivalry, New Zealand will do everything they can to knock us off, and ensure a tough game of cricket.
While I have no doubt that the Black Caps will prove formidable opponents, it is my sincere hope that the Australian XI will prove too strong tomorrow and take out their first win against New Zealand, and the first win in my Prime Ministership. Otherwise I'm in deep trouble too.
Finally, I wish to offer my appreciation to Cricket Australia and the ACT Cricket Association for their ongoing support and commitment to the PM's XI.
With your partnership and great dedication, I am sure that we will be enjoying this day of cricket for many years to come.
My very best wishes to both teams for a competitive game of cricket.
I'd also as I said in my earlier remarks, draw attention to the presence of the Deputy Prime Minister. A few things have changed this week, I today was due to be in New Delhi because we had an official visit planned to India and the Prime Minister of India, Prime Minister Singh unfortunately became ill so that visit was cancelled, hence why I am able to be with you.
Now the person who was ready to stand into the breach is, was the Deputy Prime Minister and about to be Acting Prime Minister Julia Gillard. And the look of panic on Julia's face as I explained to her, her responsibilities including the toss, active involvement in team selection and batting order and bowling order and in fact general advice [inaudible] game, was a look I shall always treasure.
So Julia, good to have you with us. I'm sorry that I'm here talking your place.
Can I say to all of you, those of our friends who've come across the Tasman and the members of the PM's XI that this is a great game, it's a great tradition in Australia and I'm glad that you are part of this continuing chapter of the Australian cricketing story.
I was with your Prime Minister yesterday in Port Moresby, John Key. And for those of you who have not seen the New Zealand Prime Minister in recent times, he's broken his arm in three places and I just assure the New Zealand team I had nothing to do with it.
He said to me to pass on to you his best wishes for the game and they are best wishes [inaudible] I am sure you will honour the great name of New Zealand in your feats on the field tomorrow.
Everyone is here because they love the game of cricket. And this is something that unites not just Australia and New Zealand but I've got to say countries and peoples across the world. Transcends racial divides, it transcends cultural divides, it transcends language divides and it is just a great celebration of life in itself.
And this small part of it, this great game and institution in Canberra each year, the Prime Minister's XI, I believe is one part of a much grander tale and that is the grand story of cricket itself.
Ladies and gentlemen thank you for being with us, let's celebrate the game tomorrow.


(Acknowledgements)
Thank you John Gallop for that tactful and diplomatic reminder of the fact, and I quote you, that New Zealand was supposed to be part of the Federation. I am sure that will be reported positively in tomorrow's New Zealand press. Your career in Australian diplomacy is once again assured.
Speaking of the diplomacy which unites our two great lands, I was speaking earlier to Sir Richard Hadlee, where is Sir Richard, gone somewhere? Can't see him (inaudible). Anyway, that means I can misrepresent grossly what he actually said. We were talking about his contribution to diplomacy and his experiences on an Australian tour in the early 1980's, when one of my distinguished predecessors was Prime Minister, RJ Hawke.
He said it was a provincial game in Australia against Geelong, or Victorian Country I think, Victorian Country XI  -  where one little kid at the end of the day raced on to the field and said to Sir Richard, ‘you know, you're a real mongrel'.
Now Sir Richard, as you know him well, is a proper chap and has a sense of proper decorum in behaviour. He then told me that he then chased after the kid across the ground and then proceeded to give him a solid dressing down.
This is of course partly caught on camera, which then caused Sir Richard when interviewed to widen the tent of his attack, and then say it was obviously a reflection of parental standards generally in Australia. And how could the Australian education system possibly produce such people, and wasn't this a problem for the current standard of Prime Ministerial leadership.
So that's what we call in the business of politics, escalation with intent. And your comments this morning John, were near brushes in the breeze compared with all of that.
Can I just say this about the Australia  -  New Zealand relationship though, it is the closest relationship that this country has. And for those of you who are here from across the Tasman, and having spent some of the last week with John Key, the new Prime Minister of New Zealand - from our point of view as Australia this is a fundamentally important relationship; has been in times past, will be for the future. And I think of no two countries with a closer set of ties than those between those from the other side of the ditch and ourselves.
I was perusing the record on how previous Prime Ministers have fared in this series. There is an interesting mathematical principle which derives from this which I have just invented.
Ming, Prime Minister Menzies, probably I think cricket tragic extraordinaire, even compared with Mr Howard. I mean I think Ming would regard himself and I think people would regard Ming as almost co-definitional with the game to the extent of tours of England that I referred to last night.
Ming however when it comes to the Prime Minister's XI, has this as his result: seven games played for one win, four losses, one tie and one no result. Not a very good score, Ming.
RJ Hawke who is thought himself as not only keen sport enthusiast, but in at least Hawkey's estimation, a damn good player of all sports as well. Bob always has a virtue when it came to, let's call it, self-confidence. Hawkey: eight games played, four wins, three losses, and one no result. So a bare pass for RJ Hawke but considerably better than Ming.
Mr Howard: 11 games played, six wins and five losses, again a bare pass.
Guess who gets the best result overall? That well-known national sporting enthusiast, PJ Keating. Three games played and three wins, no losses.
I am not sure what the mathematical principle is here but if you have a Prime Minister in office who has no demonstrable interest in this game, the national team will do better.
For myself, who actually really enjoys the game, I am following the historical trend. I've been Prime Minister for one game so far and I lost it. So I am sure Paul would be encouraged by that if he could actually understand the statistics of the game. We love Paul. It's just that as you know, he wasn't a big fan of sport.
It's a great pleasure of mine to welcome you all here today to this event and it is a real fixture in the annual calendar. As we look out on this field, and I saw this, this morning when I was here for the toss, we looked at the Jack Fingleton scoreboard. And it is my working assumption that most people in this room are either political or cricketing junkies or both - the life and times of Jack Fingleton were dominated by both in equal measure.
Jack donned the baggy green on 18 occasions for Australia in the early 1930s. This included fronting up at the top of the order in the infamous Bodyline series of 1932-33, a challenge that only the bravest competitors could ever wish for.
This was also a series for which he would go on to write the definitive historical account later in his life.
At the conclusion of his cricketing career he moved to the nation's capital, where he could cover politics for Radio Australia from the Parliamentary Press Gallery for a remarkable 38 years.
The scoreboard to our right was for many years located at the Melbourne Cricket Ground, overseeing test matches and football games alike for a generation, before she came here to retire gently and elegantly at the Manuka Oval.
I think it would be more apt, that in this fine city of Canberra, this scoreboard resides here as an ongoing reminder of his legacy to both of his professional pursuits: politics and sport.
One of the great things about this event, this game between the Prime Minister's XI and visiting touring sides, is its history.
Sir Robert Menzies as I said before, a great cricketing tragic, a great fan of the game, initiated this series a long, long time ago. And I believe it has done the city of Canberra proud by adding it to the annual events which we celebrate here.
More importantly though if you look at the role which this game has played, or this match has played in encouraging players who are younger in years. And if you look at today's list of the Prime Minister's XI, you will note that eight of the eleven players are in fact selected with an age under 25. And let's wish them all well for their future cricketing careers.
Justin Langer, I referred to at length and positively last night and I will qualify my remarks as appropriate by the end of today's play. No pressure Justin if you are listening to this anywhere and I'm sure you're not. You're concentrating on an encouraging session with the players downstairs.
The Kiwis have left us with a formidable task after lunch, five for 271 is a reasonable score here at Manuka but I am confident that we will do well in rising to the challenge and the occasion. After all, I have my own modest score line to be mindful of over here.
Mind you, when it comes to games or matches between Australia and New Zealand even it was marbles or tiddly-winks, it would bring out a degree of intensity and a performance on the field. And I believe we have seen that this morning and we will see it again this afternoon.
Already the battles between the teams representing both sides of the Tasman have been formidable. In the limited (inaudible) game there have been 112 games between Australia and New Zealand. And I believe they have contributed a lot to the overall condition of the game or the new form of the game.
The less that is said about the underarm scandal of 1981 the better. I have chosen not to mention it because my notes here actually provide an egregious joke about it which would get a big run in the New Zealand newspapers. So I am not going to do it.
In recent times, New Zealand and Australia have struck the Chappell-Hadlee Trophy, for which our visitors are here this summer. This I believe is a fantastic initiative that enables us to recognise on an annual basis the unique relationship we share on the cricketing field. And I am sure this is going to be a great season between the two of us.
So ladies and gentlemen, it's great to be here at Manuka. I appreciate the support which the local business community in particular provide to this event each year.
I appreciate the fact that the good denizens of Canberra themselves come out and support this fixture. And I think it is a great thing that here in the nation's capital we have this great sporting event each year.
If I could just say this about the great game of cricket itself more broadly. I was talking to Sir Richard Hadlee about this earlier today. We should never forget the role which this game plays, and our great national sporting culture in general plays, in underpinning the nation's spirit at times of challenge. 
It has done so in times past, it does so today and will do so in the future.
Some say well it is just a game, well it is. But you know we see reflected in the way in which this game is played, in the intensity of it, on the questions of character which are brought to bear in each game, endurance and courage and all those things.
Things that actually have a wider role to play in the character of a nation and the character of a people as we deal with challenges of life more broadly.
And those challenges will be delivered to us in large measure in the year ahead.
This is a great game. I enjoy it heaps. And I look forward very much to seeing which side prevails through the course of the afternoon. I am sure all of you will get out there and impartially back the best team, Australia.


Good evening, in the last three months, the global financial crisis has deteriorated dramatically.
We now face a global economic recession - with a massive impact on jobs right across the world.
What began with unrestrained greed on Wall Street has now spread across every economy in the world.
For Australia this reality has also hit home. Six of our ten major trading partners are now in recession.
Our biggest trading partner, China, has had its growth forecasts halved in the last year.
Australia faces a stark choice.
Act now to reduce the impact on the economy, families and jobs.
Or fold your arms and allow the free market to run its course.
The policy of this government is to act and to act decisively.
Today we have launched a massive nation-building plan to support jobs and small businesses in the short term and to build schools, energy efficient housing and roads for the long term.
The centre piece of the Plan is the largest single school modernisation program in Australia's history.
We will fund a new 21st century school library, multipurpose hall, or classroom modernisation for each of Australia's 7,400 primary schools.
We will also provide funding for new science labs or language centres for 500 secondary schools.
We will provide grants of up to $200,000 for individual school communities to fund much-needed maintenance.
Second, the Government will install ceiling insulation in up to 2.7 million Australian homes  -  with the aim of having insulation in every Australian owner/occupier house  -  good for the environment and good for jobs.
Third, we will fund the largest ever single investment in housing by building more than 20,000 new community and defence homes to help keep our tradesmen and women employed.
Fourth, we will act to support households bearing the brunt of the crisis by stimulating the economy now by paying $950 one-off tax bonuses to low and middle income families, singles, students, drought affected farmers and single income families.
Fifth, for small business we will deliver a 30 cent in every dollar investment tax break for the immediate period ahead.
In this plan, we are investing in the future and investing also to support Australian jobs.
Because of the global recession the Government will go into temporary deficit and once the global economy recovers, act to restore our budget to surplus.
That's the responsible course of action for the nation.
I recognise that a temporary deficit may not be popular.
But that is the global reality we face with virtually all Governments now in deficit.
I cannot remove the impact of the global recession on Australian jobs.
But by Government action we can reduce it.
I have absolute confidence that this strategy, combined with the great underlying strengths of the Australian economy and people, will see our nation through this crisis.
I thank you for listening.
A video of this speech is also available.


The 7th of February will become etched in our national memory as a day of disaster, of death and of mourning. This nation has been scarred by natural disasters, disasters that remind us of our tenuous hold on this vast and forbidding land: ‘Her beauty and her terror', as our nation's poem reminds us, of this ‘wide brown land'. Except that the land is now black, the earth scorched, and the people in mourning. 
Fire holds a great terror for us all. Its power, its speed, its roar, its relentless destruction, its capricious shifts in course, its want of mercy; all personal stories I've heard from its survivors in recent days.
And the numbers just mount and mount. So far 173 deaths, more than 500 injured, nearly 1,000 homes destroyed, thousands now homeless, 365,000 hectares burnt, 25 local government authorities affected, entire towns gone.
Mr Speaker, our first response as Australians must be as it has been, to extend the open hand of friendship, of empathy and of giving. The people of Victoria are not alone in this disaster because the entire nation is with them. And not just the nation but good people across the world, an expression of our common humanity.
In the last day or so I've received calls from President Obama, from Prime Minister Brown, President Barroso of the European Union, the Secretary General of the United Nations, the Prime Ministers of New Zealand and Turkey, our ANZAC brothers.
President Obama said that we should know in Australia that the prayers of himself, his wife Michelle, their family and of the American people are with the people of Victoria, the people of Australia today.
We've also received messages from others from around the world - Andorra, Brazil, China, Cuba, East Timor, France, Indonesia, Ireland, Japan, Mexico, Nauru, Peru, Pakistan, Samoa, Singapore, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sweden, The Solomons, Thailand and others.
Expressions of sympathy have also been accompanied by offers of practical help. France and Japan have made urgent inquiries as to what assistance they may offer. Thailand is proposing a financial donation to the bushfire victims. Indonesia has offered assistance with disaster victim identification. New Zealand has offered 100 fire fighters, Singapore has offered to deploy Super Puma helicopters. The United States Department of the Interior is in discussions with the Government of Victoria on the provision of personnel and assistance.
Mr Speaker, we welcome each of these offers of support and these expressions of sympathy from around the world. It is good that they have come.
Mr Speaker, all Victorians and all Australians should know that in this darkest hour, that they are not alone.
Since Saturday night the Australian Government has been working closely with the Victorian Government in response to this disaster. The Commonwealth disaster plan has been activated. The Australian Defence Force has established a Victorian-based joint taskforce of more than 450 personnel under the command of Brigadier Michael Arnold, commander of 4 Brigade.
The Joint Taskforce which includes full-time and reserve defence members from navy, army and airforce has provided tents, stretchers, sleeping bags, to accommodate 120 people at the Yea Recreation Reserve. 140 soldiers from Puckapunyal are assisting with this task. 160 reserve soldiers have been deployed to assist police with search and recovery.
The Joint Taskforce has also provided 150 portable beds or mattresses to relief centres in the Baw Baw Shire. This is to enable emergency workers with facilities so that they can get enough rest to continue their tireless work.
The taskforce also includes heavy plant, chainsaw, sections and logistics support, which have been assigned to the clean-up task. Graders, bulldozers, front end loaders and their operators have been asked to assist with fire containment measures, reopening of roads and fire fighting measures around Yea and elsewhere.
Defence Force Personnel will help build containment lines around Yea, which is still being seriously threatened with fire. Four communications-dedicated armoured personnel carriers have been sent to the town to assist defence force engineers, and to provide an emergency medical capability if required.
The ADF has also been asked to provide aerial imaging of affected areas. This will enable the identification of all residences affected by fire.
Ninety personnel from the Australian Federal police have also been deployed to help Victorian police with the investigation and response to the fires crisis centre operations and general responsibilities.
The AFP team comprises some 16 disaster victim identification specialists, 14 members from the AFP Melbourne Office to assist with the national registration inquiry service and 60 from the international deployment group operations response group.
Minister Macklin and I have both conveyed to the Victoria Police that if any further ADF personnel or AFP personnel are required they will of course be made immediately available. That will include any assistance required in the investigation into the causes of these fires.
Emergency Management Australia is also providing critical support and coordinating our response across the Government and liaising with Victorian Government agencies. Tony Pearce, director of Emergency Management Australia, has been providing me and my office with written and verbal briefings about the fire situation throughout each day.
Mr Speaker, the House will be aware that we have made available the Australian Government Disaster Relief Payment. This payment is $1,000 per adult and $400 per child for those affected by fires, in order to provide immediate cash help.
As honourable members would be aware, people escaping from fires have often arrived simply with the shirts on their back, if that. Therefore the provision of immediate cash to help get the necessities to get through the next day has been of vital importance. Payments started flowing Monday. Mr Speaker I am advised that as of close of business 9 February, we have received 2027 claims, with 427 paid, 1,600 pending. Cash payments were made at Yea, Warragul and Alexandra yesterday.
Other relief and recovery that did not have access to banks will have cash available from today. Indeed a number of banks have agreed to establish facilities at local recovery centres to make cash payments there and then.
593 adults and children have been provided with assistance worth $493,400. And authorities are working to provide further assistance as quickly as is humanly possible.
Mr Speaker, the Government's national disaster relief and recovery arrangements currently apply in 25 local government areas. Alpine, Baw Baw, Cardinia, Corangamite, Greater Bendigo, Hepburn, Horsham, Indigo, Latrobe, Macedon Ranges, Mitchell, Mount Alexander, Murrindindi, Nillumbik, Southern Grampians, Wangaratta, Wellington, West Wimmera, Whittlesea, Yarra Ranges and Lake Mountain Alpine Resort. Today South Gipsland, Greater Dandenong, Casey and Knox were added to the list. And the list continues to grow.
NDRA assistance involves measures to help with those suffering personal hardship and distress assistance. Emergency personal hardship grants, $427 per adult, $213 per child up to a maximum of $1,067 per household and temporary living and re-establishment grants of up to $8,650.
On Sunday the Commonwealth announced a $10 million contribution to an immediate community recovery fund to assist local communities, small businesses and primary producers. We are currently working with the Victorian Government on the specific details of the operation of this fund.
The Commonwealth has also made a $2 million to the Victorian Bushfire Appeal fund. I understand it currently has received donations of more than $15 million and I urge all Australians to make a contribution to this appeal. And I thank from the bottom of my heart all of those Australians who have dug deep, it is a great testament to what Australians do at times like this.
Mr Speaker, I announce to the House today that the Victorian Government in partnership with the Commonwealth Government will establish the Victorian Bushfire Reconstruction and Recovery Authority to coordinate bushfire recovery activity across Victoria. The Authority will be responsible for coordinating the effort of all local, State and Commonwealth Government agencies and the many community organisations involved aimed at helping communities to recover and to rebuild.
The Authority will be established under existing State Government legislation. The Head of the Authority will be the outgoing Police Commissioner of Victoria Christine Nixon, who will be responsible to the Premier. A CEO will be appointed. The Premier will be assisted by a ministerial advisory group. The group will include the Commonwealth's coordinating Minister, Minister Macklin.
The Head of the Authority will chair an inter-agency taskforce comprising all relevant State and Commonwealth Government agencies and local government representatives. The Authority will be supported by a dedicated project team with the specialist skills needed for the reconstruction recovery task. Community input and consultation will be directed through a community reference group.
Mr Speaker, the Australian Government can also announce today further steps to assist the natural disaster-affected areas of Victoria and Queensland.
The Government will provide an additional $5 million for emergency relief for our most recent natural disasters in Victoria and Queensland. 
This will be provided immediately to church and other non-government organisations working in the field  -  organisations such as Anglicare, the Salvation Army, St Vincent de Paul, Uniting Care and others to help them provide food and other essential supplies to those affected.
For councils in these natural disaster-affected areas, the Australian Government will allow them the opportunity to reprioritise their projects under the Government's $250 million Regional and Local Community Infrastructure Program to better meet their needs. These councils will be notified of this change in program today.
In order to assist fire-affected Victorian local governments and flood-affected Queensland local governments, I have asked that the payments for the local government Financial Assistance Grants also be accelerated. As a result, the final payment for the 2008-2009 financial year, which is due on 15 May 2009, will be brought forward to 23 February 2009.
All Victorian and Queensland councils, including those affected by the current emergency, will receive these advance payments. 
This will provide fire-affected councils with an immediate injection of funds to ensure that recovery can commence immediately. 
Mr Speaker, these funds are untied and can be spent on local priorities determined by individual councils. These priorities will vary from council to council depending on the individual circumstances of the council and the impacts of this terrible disaster. For example, Murrindindi Shire Council has lost about one-quarter of its houses. This has affected its rates base and, consequently, its ongoing cash flows.
In addition, the Commonwealth Minister for Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development and Local Government will consult with all affected councils and communities in Victoria and Queensland to determine the immediate and long term needs of their communities.
Mr Speaker, the Government today will also put in place an Income Support Recovery Assistance program for individuals who have lost their primary source of income, including small businesses and farmers, as a direct result of the Victorian fires and the floods in Queensland.
This assistance will be in the form of an ex-gratia Newstart-like payment up to the maximum rate of Newstart, for a period of 13 weeks, to be extended if necessary. 
Mr Speaker, the Australian Government, through Medicare and Centrelink, will also work with the Victorian Government to assist individuals to re-establish their identity for those who have lost licences and other proof of identity.
Mr Speaker, when you meet persons, victims of this extraordinary disaster the desperation is compounded by those who have lost every form of establishing who they are. It is something which, unless you've experienced it, is beyond imagining. It's not just the loss of memories and photos and entire family histories, it's the loss of the certification of who you are and your legal personality.
So we will provide the resources necessary through Centrelink and other agencies to assist in the immediate provision of necessary means of identification for people to begin the difficult and long task of establishing anything approaching a normal life.
Mr Speaker, job seekers in the affected areas of Queensland and Victoria, who volunteer to help with clean up and recovery efforts or who live in locations where job opportunities have effectively been destroyed will not be asked to look for work for a period. Job seekers who have been personally impacted by the tragedy would also be subject to a waiver of compliance obligations for a period of time as well.
The Australian Government will also enter into negotiations with the Victorian and Queensland governments to establish a Farming and Small Business Assistance Fund. Businesses in affected regions will be able to apply for capital grants to purchase or replace premises, machinery or other capital needs. The Australian Government's $6.4 billion Social Housing Fund - announced as part of the Nation Building Plan recently - will be available to State Governments responding to social housing needs in disaster-affected areas. The Government of Victoria will be able to draw on its estimated $1.5 billion share of the Social Housing Fund to assist families in need as a result of the Victorian bushfires. 
The government of Queensland will similarly be able to draw on its estimated $1.3 billion share of this fund to meet the needs of those affected by flooding in North Queensland. In dealing with the reconstruction and repair of schools in disaster-affected areas, the Australian Government will make available funds from the $14.7 billion Building the Education Revolution Program. 
The Victorian Government will be able to give priority to construction of school infrastructure in communities affected by bushfires. 
The Queensland Government will also be able to give priority to repairs and upgrades to those schools which may have been damaged by flooding in North Queensland.
Mr Speaker, this is a start in dealing with the tragedy that has unfolded before us in Victoria and Queensland. The Australian Government stands ready to assist in any other possible way to assist our fellow Australians in rebuilding their lives.
Given the magnitude of this study, we have deliberately made the decision to place no cap on the Commonwealth's contribution to the recovery and reconstruction effort.
This Government will be partners for the long term in the rebuilding of each of these communities.
As members of the House will be aware, it is important that all facts concerning this extraordinary natural disaster are made known. The Government will provide all assistance we can to the Royal Commission that has been announced by the Victorian Premier.
As the House will be aware, the Royal Commission will be examining all aspects of the Victorian Government's bushfire strategy and as the Premier has said, everything will be on the table.
Mr Speaker, we must do all that is possible through this Commission so that we properly prepare for the future. And we await the deliberations of that Commission and its subsequent findings.
Mr Speaker, while the Victorian firestorm has been unleashed on the good people of so many communities in that State, floods have been ravaging towns in the North of our country.
As was announced yesterday, the Minister for Small Business, Independent Contractors and the Service Economy, Dr Emerson, has gone to North Queensland to ensure funds flow quickly to flood victims and to coordinate the Commonwealth's contribution to the relief effort there.
Dr Emerson will be giving all possible support to local staff, who are doing a highly professional job, and to ensure any necessary decisions can be made quickly.
Yesterday, the Minister met with Centrelink and the Queensland Department of Communities in Townsville. He was advised that the Centrelink payments of $1,000 per eligible adult and $400 per child are flowing to victims. The payments are for people who have either been seriously injured or whose home has been destroyed, significantly damaged or inaccessible for more than 48 hours.
So far, 600 claims have been received.
This morning the Minister was briefed by the Director-General of Queensland Emergency Services. Today the Minister is meeting with Commonwealth and State officers and relief staff and local residents in Ingham, where the road is now open to 4WD vehicles for the first time in a week.
And today 20 Centrelink staff have travelled to Ingham to join those already on the ground. In Ingham, 3,000 homes have been affected with 90 per cent of businesses still closed. The town of Halifax is still isolated, but supplies are getting in by helicopter.
Mr Speaker, the Government continues to monitor closely the unfolding events in North Queensland as well.
In recent days, Mr Speaker, the nation has observed a legion of heroes at work, our emergency services workers. The CFA, the Country Fire Authority of Victoria and all those country fires authorities who have come from across the country to support their brothers and sisters in arms in dealing with their common enemy, is a testament to the enormous spirit of CFA authorities across Australia.
Their courage has been remarked upon in recent days and having heard some of the stories first hand, theirs will again be the stuff of legend. The CFA, the police, the SES, ambulance workers, those working in hospitals and those with the extraordinary and delicate task of working in the burns units of hospitals - all these deserve our utmost respect and commendation from this the Parliament of the nation and so they receive it.
In each of the centres also, Mr Speaker, the army of volunteers, the Red Cross, the Salvation Army, and others who materialise in a way best known only to God at times like this, helped I am sure by extraordinary feats of organisation by those good ladies, invariably good ladies but not always, some men as well, who are there in an instant to make it work.
It is a rolling miracle of the Australian volunteer community, of the church and charitable sector, that this great army of people immediately comes and is there, without complaint, without request for anything in particular. Prepared, with sleeves rolled up, quietly, effectively, assiduously doing the job, And in each centre that I visited yesterday and the day before, Yea and Whittlesea and Alexandra and also other centres as well, this army of volunteers, working quietly and effectively.
In one centre I visited, literally acres of bedding provided by local shops, local families, ready to be made available to those who now have nothing. Entire gymnasiums full of clothing, kids' clothing, toys, bedding, anything else that you might need to start up a household all materialised within a day or two of the ask going out. An extraordinary testament to those communities. An extraordinary testament to the church and charitable and community organisations who have made the physical organisation of it possible.
Mr Speaker, we are left speechless at the thought and the possibility that some of these fires may have been deliberately lit. Every member of this House cannot comprehend how anyone could ever do that.
Mr Speaker, something which the nation must now attend to as a matter of grave urgency is the problem of arson. Where it happens, why it happens, what more can be done about it.
There is no excuse for this. None at all. This, as I said yesterday, is simply murder on a grand scale. Let us attend to this unfinished business of the nation and come to grips with this evil thing.
Mr Speaker, the fires continue. And as we assemble here in the nation's parliament today to reflect on what has happen in days past and the acts of heroism and the experience of tragedy, let us each one of us remember that they are all still in the field today. In so many different parts of Australia.
In Victoria, in New South Wales and elsewhere, fighting the great elements of nature which bear down on communities. We salute each one of them.
We also, as we gather here today, reflect on the lives and families which are now permanently shattered. This is an unspeakable horror for those families. Unspeakable.
The ability to recover from events of such extraordinary trauma will be sorely tested in the days, weeks and years ahead. One of the things that the Minister Jenny Macklin has been determined to do has been to try and make sure we have a sufficient availability of counsellors in the field now.
Counsellors for the families who are now bereaved. Counsellors for those who are friends and neighbours and know or who have seen their friends and neighbours perish. The trauma of scars and blackened vehicles along the road, that I saw yesterday in Marysville.
The trauma also of country fire authority personnel, who have confronted this firsthand, and the police and the emergency services personnel dealing with the aftermath.
The physicality and the emotional scar of trauma reaches deep into people and this is a much and necessary area of work to be done and done as well as possible in the days ahead.
Mr Speaker, we do not know what lies ahead. What I have outlined to the House today is our response to date. Let us all work with governments at all levels and at all communities and with all community organisations with to deal with each challenge as it presents itself.
I say this to the country at large - whatever community you are from, if it has been rendered to ashes, if it has been destroyed, hear this from the Government and the Parliament of the nation, together we will rebuild each of these communities.
This will take time. It will take effort.
Yesterday I sat in the community hall at Alexandra and spoke with a lady of a certain age who was the town's local historian. The town in question being Marysville. And she asked this question of me, ‘What is to be the town historian, for a town who is no more?' She said this year the town was about to celebrate the 40th anniversary of its historical society. Would there be a 50th?
I told her, Mr Speaker, on behalf of the Government and I believe the Parliament, that there will be. That this town and others like it will be rebuilt. Brick by brick, school by school, community hall by community hall.
Because that must underpin our long term resolve as a Government, as a Parliament, as a Nation. To be there with these communities not just in the trying and difficult days and weeks that lie ahead but in the arduous task of the months and years that lie ahead, until one day we can look back before too much time has gone and say, these towns, these communities have been reborn.
Mr Speaker, I read the contributions from members of the House on both sides of this debate yesterday. I thank them for it. I acknowledge the contributions of individual members of parliament, some of who understandably are still not with us today but attending to their local communities. I have sought to speak to a number of those members during the course of today.
We have a large task ahead of us and it will be uneven in the recovery, that is the nature of things. But let us resolve clearly, in full witness of the nation at large, that this will be our common resolve: to rebuild each of these communities so that these communities can live again.


Firstly, this is an honour to be with you today because you're a community which is surviving and building and becoming strong again.
A little while ago, I think a day or two ago, I was telephoned in my office by a lady I'd never met before. Her name was Rose. Where are you Rose? There she is. She's a persistent lady. (Laughter and applause.) And so, I had this message there from Rose could I please call back. There's been a few calls into the office this week about a range of things. So I'm sorry it took a day or so to come back, but I spoke to her the other night and she described a little bit about what's happened in your town.
It was good to talk to someone local about what has happened here. Because what has happened is a story of what is happened everywhere. But it's also very special for you as members of this community.
This morning I had the honour of sitting down with each of the representatives of your local council. People who you've elected, voted for and they speak for you. It was a very good meeting as we went through each of the practical challenges which lie ahead. But beyond that, it gave me a sense of just the scope of what has happened here. And I thank the Mayor  -  Sue, where are you? - and other councillors, for spending that time with me and with Jenny Macklin who is with me today.
What do you say in the midst of tragedy?
I think there are two things that I can say. One is this, to know that you are not alone. You are not alone. It's not just that your community here in Wandong, and the Wandong district has rallied behind you in such strength and such force - so too has the entire state and the nation and the world.
Yesterday, after speaking to Rose, I spoke to Tim Fischer who had just come from the audience in Rome with Pope Benedict XVI. The first words of the Pope were about your community here. The Pope wanted to pass on through our representative, Tim Fischer in Rome, his deepest prayers, his deepest sympathies and his deepest love for all of you. I do that this morning on this the day of service and of worship.
So if there's one thing to say is that you're not alone.
The other is to say this, together we rebuild. Together we rebuild. And brick by brick, house by house, street by street, we rebuild. And we rebuild together. And not just for tomorrow, not just for next week, and not just for next month, but until this community is rebuilt completely.
I heard a little bit this morning from your councillors about the scope, the size of this community. Some - correct me if I'm wrong Mayor - 2,200 people in Wandong and Heathcote Junction and in the Wandong District.
(MAYOR: Yes, that's correct.)
I got a tick.
And of, among those people, good people who live in this good community, some 200 houses are now gone or destroyed or damaged.
So our first responsibility to understand the scope of that, that's one in 10. So we have a very practical challenge to work through. And we will do that. House by house, street by street, although it will take time. Time to do well.
There are those who are injured, and they must be attended. Injuries to the body and injuries to the soul. This brings me to the three of your number who have perished in these flames. I've heard these stories this morning. And they are the human face of absolute tragedy.
So as we move forward, what I say to you as Prime Minister is this - we intend and we resolve to be with you every step of the way from here.
This is an easy thing to say, it is a much harder thing to do. But I am determined that we will honour this commitment to you and each of these communities that have been ravaged by these fires.
I cannot promise to you that it will be done perfectly each step of the way. We're all human beings. But I can undertake to you this. That we'll be with you every step of the way until each community is rebuilt.
As Australians we reflect on what make us Australian. I often put it into these terms, and these fires have brought it home again: one of the great virtues and values which we hold dear and have held dear since ANZAC to present  -  courage, resilience, compassion.
I see an army of courage out here to my right called the CFA. (Applause)
Wandong Brigade, Kilmore, those who have helped from further afield. The fact that you could have your Wandong Brigade people out there defending everybody in this scarred landscape which is 20 metres from where I speak, and at the same time their own houses, four of them, or half a dozen of them, burning down. I've met this morning this young family and in exactly that situation, and others who have lost their homes as well.
You know what they've said to you blokes, and the good woman who runs you, and the good women in your number, is that you have genuine guts, genuine strength, and you do something for the nation's soul at hard times. Because you know what you've done in these actions? You put yourself last and put the community first. And as Prime Minister of Australia I thank you. (Applause)
Around the world we see our boys in green led by the Chief of the Defence Force who I've brought here today, Angus Houston, doing that all the time, putting themselves last and putting their comrades in arms first, and putting their country first of all. And our army boys have been out there too helping (inaudible).
Resilience, well you know, that's sticking to the task. We've all got a challenge of resilience. That's something which happens in your heart and in your stomach.
And I heard from the local authorities here you're going to get together for a community festival soon. This is good, it's part of resilience. And compassion.
The army of people here who are chaplains, who are from the churches, who are from the Salvos, who are from the Red Cross, who are from every community and charitable organisation supported by the arms of government through the Victorian Government and the Federal Government, and the local government.
There is an army of courage and we are surrounded by a sea of compassion, and you are part of it. And not just what you say, it's not just putting an arm around somebody although that is important, it's what you then do. And each of you is in the business of doing.
But coming here to Wandong today, thank you Rose, by the way we've also discovered something else in Wandong today, and that's what happened to Elvis. Elvis is still with us. Dropping 9,000 litres I gather in a hit in Wandong, I gather.
But here at Wandong and hearing these great stories and these very sad stories, you in this community, full of courage, resilience and compassion, telling your message to the nation and the world at large. As Prime Minister of Australia, I salute each and everyone of you.


When I came here tonight I was accosted by Jamie Mackie, and he's entitled to do that. He's been around for a bit. And his questions is always disarming but frank, which is ‘How goes the relationship? Are you taking it seriously?'
My response to him was along these lines - that in the year 2008, the President of Indonesia, Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono and I met on seven occasions. We've now entered that into the Guinness Book of Records under the bilateral relations heading.
Stephen Smith, the Foreign Minister, says that in 2008 that the two-way traffic in terms of ministerial visits was 32. If you look at the official fabric of the relationship, there is a lot going on. And this is a very broad, important and vital relationship for us, as is reflected by that level of contact and having been myself to Indonesia three times in the last year.
What does all that mean? It means for us in our part of this relationship that it is of vital importance to Australia. It means therefore, that whatever challenges we face together in our region or the world at large, we in this country Australia have a first instinct, which is how do we work with Indonesia on this.
Geraldine's anecdote before about the UN conference that she visited is I think an interesting insight. Somewhere in the world, if we are there and you are there, we often find ourselves quite rightly talking closely with one another because after more than half a century of dealing with one another, I think we now know each other. And this is a very good thing.
The familiarity of that and the ties that bind were at work most recently in the extraordinary natural disasters which visited Australian shores  -  the fires in Victoria. The extraordinary generosity of the Indonesian Government and people in their remarks, their sentiments, their gifts of money to the bushfire appeal, the personnel that they sent, are known across Australia. This is a very good thing, and I thank our Indonesian friends for it.
As I said in the House of Representatives last week on this question, through those actions and through those words we know one thing in Australia - Indonesia is not just our neighbour, Indonesia is our friend. And what you said and what you did spoke very clearly to that reality. And as I also said in the parliament last week, I believe our friends in Indonesia discovered the same of us at the time of the tsunami.
There was this unspeakable act of nature, inflicted upon so many people across Aceh and also in Sumatra. But the instantaneous response in this country was that of our common humanity and that of friend and neighbour. Summed up in a few words  -  how can we help? What can we give?
And I think as we confronted these great challenges of nature which have left most of us speechless, in their ferocity, in the intensity and the death and destruction that they have left, it has been a sober reminder for us all. But not just of brutal power of nature, but of the enormous strength of our common humanity as neighbours and friends.
There is a text of my remarks tonight. If you wish to read it, it will be on my website. I don't intend to bore you with it.
Let me say a few things about this relationship and where it has been and where I hope it might go in the future, and to the role of this institute and this conference in that regard.
When we in the Australian Government, and this Australian Labor Government, look back at the history of the Australian-Indonesia relationship, we are intensely proud of our role in the events of 1947. We know them, we actually understand that Prime Minister Chifley and Foreign Minister Evatt at the time were doing something quite unusual for a Western country in relation to a colonial power, namely the Kingdom of the Netherlands, with what we said as a party in the government at the time was, we will side with the people of Indonesia in their act of self-determination.
And I believe that pride is shared more broadly across the Australia political spectrum, as from the beginning, from those difficult days of independence and the difficult times which were experienced by your independence movement at the end of the Second World War, that we have some pride in what our government did then in support of Indonesia's legitimate expression of its right to self-determination.
And I look back at what has happened with the great Indonesian Republic since 1947, and look to the present, I see this extraordinary transformation. This extraordinary act of nation building. It is remarkable across the 17,000 islands. More than 230 million people. You have fashioned this vibrant democracy. You have fashioned this strong and growing economy despite the challenges we all now face. And a society which is intrinsically tolerant.
Mention before was made of the study of pancasila and the whole concept of diversity and unity, and unity and diversity.
For Australians, this may seem to be an interesting concept as we think we have diversity here and we do. Spending a few weeks or a few months rolling around Indonesia is where you really encounter diversity. From Banda Aceh in one extreme to West Papua at the other and all points in between. From the high cultures of Borobodur through to the outermost parts of Kalimantan and Sulawesi, it is a remarkable thing which Indonesia has done. To fashion this vibrant country, this robust democracy, this growing and strong economy, and this cultural tradition of tolerance and mutual respect. I personally would simply congratulate our friends in Indonesia for the extraordinary achievement of your national community.
When I look at the present and where this great country and this high civilisation now stands in the councils of the world, Indonesia's place in our region is well-known and well-established and well-secured. But I believe there is a broader mandate. There you are in Indonesia as the largest Muslim country in the world. There you are as an extraordinary and dynamic Muslim democracy. And there I think you have an extraordinary role to play in the wider councils of the world and we in Australia would like to be partners with you in that.
The democracy of which I spoke before of course has been hard fought. I remember, and some of you have heard this story before, being an election monitor in the 1999 elections on behalf of the Australian parliament in Surabaya. And watching in the couple of weeks of that formal election campaign as all the parties paraded by, I won't name them in case I offend anyone here, but it was this great individual celebration of Indonesian democracy. And given that there had been some pause prior to that, the fact that those elections and these subsequent elections can be conducted so effectively is again a tribute to the way in which the Indonesian people celebrate the freedoms with which they have.
As we turn to the future, I think there is something new which is now happening for us both. If you look at what has been our preoccupation in Canberra and Jakarta since the '40s, it is often - not always but often  -  been about how we deal with each other. I really like the analogy about Tom and Jerry by the way. Tom and Jerry are now getting on pretty well. And they will.
But you know, here's the different thing. And it started in the '80s, when we began fashioning regional organisations which would embrace all of our friends and partners across South-East Asia and beyond. Your role obviously historically within ASEAN but more broadly of course with APEC. And now more recently again the Australian Summit. And this is good. Because the habits of cooperation between nations and cultures do not happen automatically, they have to be crafted, they have to be grown, they have to be nurtured.
If you look at the history of ASEAN for example, and there are those in this room who are of much greater scholarly depth in this question than I am, the history of ASEAN is a group of adversaries back there in the '60s, not all but some, who now more than 40 years later have a habit and a culture of cooperation and mutual respect about themselves which is remarkable in the transformation which has been achieved. The historical conflict between non-communist South-East Asia and communist Indo-China, this is a remarkable achievement of institution building where Indonesia has been at the centre.
But now we enter a new period again, where the challenges we face are within our region but beyond our region, because we now are in, as we know full well from the events of the last year or so, unbridled globalisation.
And that means that in managing this extraordinary set of global challenges we now face, most acutely those now of the economy, Australia and Indonesia now find ourselves, not looking at each other, but working with each other and looking to the world.
How do we fix this? How do we work together? How do the major emerging economies and countries including Indonesia, work with other countries, including Australia, through the G20, to deal with the great challenges we now face?
How do we bring about the stabilisation of global financial markets? How do we deal with the challenges of restoring stability to global banks who currently have problems with bad assets on their balance sheets, which is in turn polluting the extent to which private credit markets can be restored to anything approaching normal health.
How do we in the meantime achieve sufficient levels of fiscal stimulus within our economies to provide the level of economic growth and jobs and performance in our economy so that our peoples are not subject to the full wrath and full impact of this crisis which is not of their making?
How do we design the rules for the financial order of the future? What should be the future role of the International Monetary Fund?
What Indonesia and Australia are now doing as a developed and a developing country, and through my good friendship and relationship with President Yudhoyono, is now we are working together on the problems of the world.
That is the new thing that we are doing. Not just looking at each other and working out whether we like each other or not, that is the past. I think we have worked out that we do.
It is not just building the institutions of our region, there is a lot of work still there to do. And we have proposals which we are discussing on that front as well.
But I believe there is now a much bigger and broader mandate. And if we exercise effectively the opportunities now presented to us by our common participation in this organisation, then together we can make a good contribution to the world together.
There's a funny thing that happens at that point. When the rest of the world looks at a developed country of Christian heritage, primarily in Australia, working in close and effective collaboration with the largest Muslim country in the world, seamlessly, this actually has a very powerful message to those beyond our region.
And I think that's something we should bear in mind as well.
The challenges we face as modern democracies and economies in 2009 are virtually unprecedented in the century which has passed. This will test all of our mettle. It will test the calibre of our officials, it will test the content of our policy, it will test our ability to cooperate internationally on dealing with the great challenges we now face.
But I am confident that we, together with our friends and partners across the world, can determine and execute a strategy which will see us through. It will not be easy. The challenges that we will face at the upcoming London summit of the G20 will be great indeed.
But if we focus our efforts on these great challenges and we again encourage the habits of cooperation, then there is a way through. Central to that challenge is this: to work globally to deal with the challenge of bad assets on a large continuing number of major global banks and their balance sheets, because until that is dealt with effectively in many countries around the world, the restoration of normal credit flows through the private credit markets will not occur.
We can act on stimulus, we can support growth in jobs through what we inject through budget but until that challenge is wrestled to the ground then our recovery will never be complete.
This institute and your conference, and it's 20 years since this institute was founded, is wrestling with a challenge also at a different level. Which is, how do you take what I have just described as the healthy broad fabric of the official relationship between our two countries and take it to the highways and the byways, to the kampong? And how do we in Indonesia and in Australia, make sure that as we embark upon what will be the century of the Asia Pacific, that this is not just a relationship which is constructed between officials and nurtured through official circles, but in fact is much broader, deeper and base in our common peoples.
I believe there is a great spirit of goodwill across our peoples towards one another and that's reflected in their responses most recently to natural disasters.
But there is more to be done and part of the pathway to doing more is looking again at how we do better these great challenges of language, of culture and religion. Australia needs to do better, a lot better, in our level of Indonesian language study, in development of Indonesian studies within our universities and in our schools and our understanding of the enormous complexity that is Indonesian Islam.
And what we have as vision for Australia, as the Government of the country is this: to create in this country in Australia, the most Asia-literate country in the west. A country which, as Geraldine said before, regards the languages and cultures of this wider region as not foreign but familiar. That we understand, intimately, the cultures and high cultures of this great region, including those which are contained within modern Indonesia.
So we have a challenge and that is to do better than we have and we intend to rise to that challenge. One of the proposals the President of Indonesia and I have agreed on is in the area of faith and belief. How do we as Australia and Indonesia, for the future, become models for how the great dialogue and understanding which can occur between Christianity and Islam, be taken further?
And we will between us, at an appropriate time soon, host between us a great conference, a large conference on interfaith dialogue. Some may say, well that is soft and that is not really a core part of a hard political or economic relationship. I disagree. I think this is in fact exceptionally important to the way in which our peoples' understanding of one another unfolds into the future.
So it is through practical measures such as that, in language and culture and faith and interfaith dialogue, that there is much to be done and this Government of Australia intends to do it.
Finally, for your conference itself. There is no point in having a conference like this unless I give you homework and I think Bapak Hassan would agree. So in your deliberations, we through the Australian Foreign Minister Stephen Smith would like to hear back your concrete ideas about what we do in the future of this people-to-people relationship.
None of us in this room have any monopoly on wisdom. I certainly don't. When I hear the stories from the three young people before about their experiences, for me they speak with eloquence about the opportunities which have been extended to them.
How do we make their experiences multiply by 1000 and 10,000 and 100,000? That is the challenge I would like you to reflect on. And that is the challenge I would like you to deliver some possibilities for those of us in Government to contemplate in the years' ahead.
Bapak Hassan, you are a welcome guest in Australia as always and to you and your ministerial colleagues, I know from their reports back to me today and the progress which has been achieved in discussions also between Simon Crean and his most elegant counterpart, that we are making progress in that part of our relationship as well, in trade.
It is a good thing that we have such high level representation from our friends in the Indonesian government at this conference and let us see this conference and the ideas which come from it as providing yet another stepping stone, another building block into a new period in the Australia-Indonesia relationship where we become joint participants in the great enterprise of dealing with the problems which the worlds needs our collective answers on.
I thank you.
ends


Fellow members of the great Australian family.
When the histories of nations are written, there are times which sorely test each nation's soul. 
Whether through the carnage of human conflict or through the terrifying forces of nature unleashed.
This nation Australia has just been put to such a test.
And you the people of Australia, you the people of Victoria, and most especially you the people of these fire-ravaged communities - you have faced the test - and you have not been found wanting.
As a people, we weep for the lost. 
We tend the injured. 
We console the suffering.
And yet our work has barely begun.
In meeting this great test, as a people, and as a nation, we have drawn deep on our ancient values and given them fresh voice in our modern age. 
Values of courage. 
Values of compassion. 
Values of steely resilience. 
These are Australian values. Values also of our deepest common humanity.
For on Black Saturday, what we saw at work was the worst of nature yet the best of humanity.
What is courage?
We know it by instinct. We see it. We feel it.
Courage is a fire fighter standing before the gates of hell - unflinching, and unyielding and with eyes of steel saying this: "Here I stand, I can do no other". 
Courage is neighbour saving neighbour.
Courage is stranger saving stranger.
Courage is all these things as brave women and men in their lives and in their deeds these last weeks have written a new chapter in our nation's story.
A new army of heroes where the yellow helmet evokes the same reverence as the slouch hat of old.
Courage. And compassion.
In recent days, we have witnessed unspeakable suffering.
We have lost mothers and fathers, grandmothers and grandfathers, brothers, sisters, sons and daughters, the tiniest of children, family and friends and neighbours.
All these are precious lives. No words can provide solace for grief so personal.
But simply know this: you who suffer are not alone.
This great Australian family, here assembled and across the nation today, is with you. And led by an almighty army of Australian volunteers stretched across this vast continent. 
And beyond our shores, know too that you are also surrounded by an ocean of compassion from every country on God's earth.
In some countries, tragedy exposes the fault lines in a nation. 
The strong abandoning the weak; one region indifferent to the sufferings of another, one culture uncaring as to the needs of another. 
But ours is a different nation. Our nation has been as one.
Australia - a nation of compassion. Courage and compassion. And the third of these great values: resilience.
What we have seen in each of these communities is resilience writ large. 
Resilience reflected in the absolute and resolute determination to rebuild. 
And this is where the nation comes in.
A solemn contract with each of these communities to rebuild: brick by brick, home by home, school by school, church by church, street by street, community by community. 
Governments of all persuasions and at all levels have failed communities in the past. Let us resolve not to fail these communities in the future.
To say this is easy. To do this will be hard and the path will be uneven. 
But let us resolve, learning from the mistakes of the past, to rebuild together.
To rebuild Marysville, Narbethong and Toolangi.
To rebuild Kinglake, Kinglake West and Flowerdale.
Strathewen, St Andrews and Humevale.
Wandong, Heathcote Junction and Upper Plenty. 
Churchill, Callignee and Koornalla. 
Steels Creek and Yarra Glen. 
These names and others that are now etched deep in the nation's memory.
For the truth is this: each of these communities is Australia - and we would be a lesser Australia without any of them. So let us to the task.
Last Sunday as I travelled on the road to Kinglake, it was as if I was walking through the valley of the shadow of death.
Last night I spoke with a young woman from a community nearby who had lost everything but survived. She told me she had spent yesterday with her Dad, starting to clean up the wreckage.
She told me the first thing they did was to plant a charred sapling in the burnt ground as their flag pole - and put up our nation's flag.
She told me she and her Dad then sat quietly together just looking at the flag - and then to work.
Our nation's flag now flies across the charred remains of these precious communities - flags by the hundred.
Flags of courage. Flags of compassion. Flags of resilience. Flags of hope.
Great Australian values that will see Australia through this great testing of our nation's soul.
So let us resolve today that from this time forth, on every 7th of February, this nation's flag will fly at half mast, this nation will pause for a moment's silence, to honour those lost and to reaffirm afresh, this great rebuilding for the future.
As we rise together in hope, from the ashes of despair.


To His Excellency Dr Edward Fenech Adami, President of Malta, and his charming wife who is with us here this evening. To other members of the Maltese delegation led by the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs. To the Leader of the Opposition Mr Turnbull, friends of Malta, and in this country you are all friends of Australia.
Could I say, having spent now some time speaking with the President of Malta, how good it is to be among friends? We have reflected on the ties that bind. And the ties that bind this small country, this small island in the middle of the Mediterranean and this larger island in the middle of the Pacific is an extraordinary tale of history. It's a tale of culture, it's a tale of history, it is a tale of peoples, it is a tale of war, it is a tale of suffering, it is a tale of comfort and of course it is a tale which has its future in what we now do together.
When you reflect on this extraordinary culture and community in this island of Malta, those of us who are minded of history reflect upon the significance of this island in Mare Nostrum, the Mediterranean, and the extraordinary unfolding of the empire that was Rome.
But as his Excellency the President reminded me, the ancient cultures that have occupied that island for millennia before Rome built structures which remain today, which remain the oldest built structures anywhere in the world.
Of course in the wider spread of the history of our civilisations, the fact that St Paul was shipwrecked in Malta, the fact that he stayed in your midst for three months, the fact that Malta as a consequence has been a large part of the New Testament story is a part of Maltese history and its future contribution to Christian civilisation.
Malta itself of course has been the home and host of these ancient orders, the Orders of St John and of course those whom we describe today as the Knights of Malta. This is an ancient tale but it's still a modern tale because in that history in the Order of St John Hospitaller, you have also the beginnings of a medieval chivalric order, which centuries later then provides hospice and comfort as well as healing to Australian diggers who had just returned from the shores of Gallipoli.
There they came, together with others from across the world, in engagement on Gallipoli's shores and then for their rest, their recuperation but for many their dying and their passing and their eternal rest, Malta was the place to which they went. And still today, tended by the good people of Malta as of this day, lie on her soil sons of our soil, cared for tenderly by the people of that extraordinary island.
Last year when I was in London I spent some time with Her Majesty the Queen. Her Majesty the Queen opened by asking me about Malta. I found this a curious start to the conversation and as all conversations with Her Majesty the Queen, they should remain private. So I won't elaborate other than to say that her affection for your country, given her time there as a young woman when she was a princess and not yet queen, was told to me as a visiting and fellow member of the Commonwealth with great affection and with great warmth. And with an intensity of memory which suggested to me that she regards your island and your country as very near and dear to her heart and to her family.
Which brings us of course to the bonds which now exist between us as members of the Commonwealth. Malta, Australia, working together. This is a good thing. And there are many practical challenges for us to attend to in the councils of the Commonwealth and the councils of the world. This is important work. Some have decried the value of the Commonwealth. I do not.
My simple view of international relations is this. Whether it is the United Nations, whether it is the Security Council, the General Assembly, or the great councils of the world, or other councils including the Commonwealth, where we are working together for the common good as we are, through the councils of the Commonwealth, this in fact is a good thing.
His Excellency the President, who is a person more experienced in politics than myself, being a person who has been in Maltese politics both Prime Minister and the President over not just many years, but many decades, passed to me the observation from an earlier meeting of the Commonwealth Head of Government.
That here you have this extraordinary collection of governments from around the world, from as parts as distant as the United Kingdom itself, Malta, India, Australia, Malaysia, Singapore, Canada, and the members of the Caribbean, all united of course by a common experience of England, sometimes a challenging experience, but united still by a bond of language which actually makes our common discourse more possible. But beyond that a sense of common values which cause us as a Commonwealth to be good citizens of the world.
For Australia, we have yet a further advantage when it comes to our friends in Malta. And it is this. So many of your sons and daughters have chosen to become our sons and daughters. 150,000 from this tiny island in the middle of the Mediterranean are now one of us. And they have been for some generations. In fact, as His Excellency reminded me, and the High Commissioner earlier, going back well into the 19th Century.
The Maltese people have been great contributors to our nation, our national life, our businesses, our communities, our cultural diversity. And our national family as Australia would not be as complete were it not for you being part of us. One of the great tales, Excellency, about modern Australia is this. We have about us this characteristic as Australians, which is unity through diversity. And in all of our diversities, still unity still. And this I believe is a great strength and as part of that strength we have this community from this distant island which is now part of us and part of our identity. And for that,Your Excellency, I extend through you our thanks to your community back home, that so many have chosen to be one with us.
Your Excellency, we are honoured by the fact that you have chosen to visit us. And we are honoured by the fact that you have chosen to spend time with us in Australia. We are honoured by the fact that as a key member of the European Union, you choose to be an active participant and fellow contributor with Europe and Australia in dealing with common challenges which now confront the international order. Challenges of security, challenges of how we deal with the global economic crisis, challenges of climate change, challenges as are known only too well in the Mediterranean of dealing with persons who are displaced from various countries from around the world and the challenges of asylum.
I therefore Mr President, would conclude with these remarks. Know in Australia as this, that you are among friends because your people have become our friends, and in fact have become one with us. And know also this, that in Australia there is a government which wishes to work with you and the councils of Europe and in the councils of the Commonwealth to assist to craft a world for the future in which we can all have pride.
Your Excellency, I thank you for your visit.


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet and whose culture we celebrate as one of the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
If you have heard the stories of those who have suffered from chronic diseases, and been given the gift of life through a transplant  - 
Or if you have heard the stories of the families for whom a donor organ never arrived in time  - 
You can be in no doubt this is a cause that really matters.
It's a cause worth fighting for.
There is no question that Australia delivers excellent clinical outcomes for transplant patients.
But our donor rates are too low.
And the Australian Government is determined to change that.
So that instead of lagging behind other nations, Australia can be a leader in organ and tissue donation and transplantation.
If you have any questions about how important this is, just look into the eyes of my 2 year old friend who is here today, Cordelia Whatman, the thankful recipient of a liver transplant.
Or her 4 year old sister, Octavia, who is nearly big enough and old enough to be made an ambassador for organ donor awareness.
Or speak to 8 year old Taleaha and 4 year old Rory here, whose mum Kylie is waiting for a double lung transplant.
Australia has a transplant waiting list of around 1,800 people.
That is 1,800 Cordelias and Kylies.
1,800 Australians for whom a transplant may be the difference between a normal, healthy life and debilitating chronic illness.
We're here today for them  -  and for thousands more Australians, in the years ahead, whose lives will be changed by an organ or tissue transplant.
In July last year, I said national leadership to lift organ donation rates was long overdue.
I said it was time to end the blame game between different levels of government and different parts of the health system.
I said we needed to take action, and focus our efforts in the places where we can actually get results.
That is why the Government is investing an unprecedented $151.1 million over the next four years to reform the national organ and tissue donation system and save lives.
The plan was endorsed by all State and Territory governments on July 3 last year at the Council of Australian Governments meeting.
That plan centres on taking action where it matters most  -  in our hospitals.
The plan aims to ensure that:
     * potential donors are properly identified at hospitals across the country;
     * every family of a potential donor will be asked about organ donation;
     * a dedicated specialist will work with the potential donor and their family to provide support through what is often a very, very difficult process;
     * hospital staff will be able to focus on donor care knowing that the hospital has a separate budget to cover organ and tissue donation;
     * families receive the support they need at the time of organ donation and afterwards; and
     * there will be an equitable and safe process for managing transplant waiting lists and allocating organs once they become available.
There are five components to the national plan I announced in July last year.
The first component is $46 million to introduce a coordinated, consistent approach under the leadership of a new, independent national authority - the Australian Organ and Tissue Donation and Transplantation Authority.
The legislation for the new Authority went through Parliament last September, and it is now up and running.
It is led by Karen Murphy, an experienced CEO with a proven track record of successfully managing change in large organisations and working collaboratively across both the public and private sectors.
Under her leadership, the Authority is working quickly to build its capacity and implement this ambitious reform agenda.
Our plan also allocates $67 million to employ trained medical specialists and other staff dedicated to organ donation.
They will work closely with emergency department and intensive care unit teams in selected public and private hospitals across Australia.
The third element is $17 million in new funding for hospitals to meet additional staffing, bed and infrastructure costs associated with organ donation.
The fourth component is $13 million towards raising community awareness and building public confidence in Australia's donation for a transplantation system.
The fifth component is funding of $2 million for counsellors to support donor families.
This is a comprehensive plan.
It tackles the point at which our organ donor system is currently failing - where we need dedicated staff in emergency wards and intensive care units, trained to help families through the difficult circumstances they confront just at the time when getting consent matters.
It was developed on the basis of evaluating international experience  -  evidence that highlighted the need for national leadership, and the need for dedicated specialist staff.
Today I announce the next step in implementing the national plan.
For the Authority's efforts to be as successful as possible, it needs to get the best advice  -  both from within the medical community and from a wide range of community voices.
We know that we need to engage with the wider community so that more Australians understand just what a gift of life organ donation can be. 
That is why we will establish an Advisory Council - to provide ongoing advice and input to the Authority.
The Advisory Council will consist of members selected on the basis of substantial experience or knowledge in at least one of the following fields:
     * organ or tissue donation and transplantation; 
     * public administration; 
     * business; 
     * management; 
     * finance and 
     * health consumer issues.
I'm pleased today to announce that Sam Chisholm will chair the Advisory Council.
Sam Chisholm is one of the most experienced hands in the Australian business community  -  most famously as the Chief Executive and Managing Director who led the Nine Network through the many years when it dominated Australian television ratings.
If anybody knows how to get Australians to watch and listen, Sam does.
Sam is also the recipient of a double lung transplant in 2003.
He's also been a director of the Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute.
So he will bring to this role the same grit and passion he's famously demonstrated throughout his professional life.
Sam will be supported by the following members of the Advisory Council:
     * Professor John Horvath AO, the Chief Medical Officer
     * Dr David Boadle, Tasmania's Deputy Chief Health Officer
     * Prof Don Chalmers, Dean of the Law Faculty at the University of Tasmania with expertise in health law and ethics
     * Ms Anne Cahill Lambert AM, a tireless advocate in this area waiting herself for a double lung transplant; also a former CEO of the Royal Australian College of Medical Administrators and former CEO of the Women's Hospitals Australasia and the Children's Hospitals Australasia
     * Professor Geoff Dobb, head of the Royal Perth Hospital's Department of Intensive Care with expertise in brain death and organ donation
     * David Koch  -  Kochie has of course done a huge amount to promote donor awareness on the Sunrise program and brings business and financial expertise
     * Professor Jeremy Chapman OAM  -  one of Australia's most highly experienced transplant specialists and a clinical professor at the University of Sydney
     * Mrs Rachel Martin, donor family member 
     * Dr Marisa Herson, head of Victoria's Donor Tissue Bank
     * Dr Anthony Cross, emergency physician and intensivist at the Box Hill Hospital
     * Dr Gerry O'Callaghan  -  Senior Consultant, Intensive and Critical Care, Flinders Medical Centre
     * Ms Amanda Rischbeith  -  National President of the Australian College of Critical Care Nurses
     * Dr Dianne Stephens OAM  -  Director of Intensive Care at the Royal Darwin Hospital
     * Professor Russell Strong AC  -  Medical Director, Queenslanders Donate
These members give the Council a tremendous depth of skill expertise ranging across critical care, transplantation, the medical and nursing professions, donor families, transplant recipients and those on the waiting list.
I want to thank each Council member for taking on this responsibility.
Your advice will be important to making the national plan successful.
Progress on the national plan is also advancing in other areas as the Authority begins taking the practical steps that will help get the results to which we are committed.
Health Ministers have agreed to the implementation of national ‘clinical triggers' across all public and private hospital Emergency Departments and Intensive Care Units.
These clinical triggers will help clinicians on the ground to rapidly and accurately identify potential donors.
Consultations with the medical professions are now underway.
The Authority is also working to implement the new National Paired Kidney Exchange Program.
This will help link potential donors to recipients across the country, where a family member or friend who is willing to donate is not compatible.
The Organ Donor Awareness Week is an excellent opportunity to raise awareness and get the message about Cordelia, Kylie and thousands of other Australians.
So I am pleased to launch this week's efforts.
And I am particularly pleased to be launching the Terry Connolly ORGANised Walk that will set off at 7am tomorrow from Regatta Point.
This is a great initiative to encourage people to talk with their families about registering for organ donation.
Helen reminds me that it was Terry who, back in the 1980s while I was in China, made sure that my ALP party membership dues were processed and kept in order.
And it was also Terry who recruited the Deputy Prime Minister to the Labor Party on campus at the University of Adelaide in the 1970s.
We will be walking tomorrow in memory of Terry, and in support of increased donor awareness.
The success of this week's efforts is important to increasing donor levels and achieving the vision that is behind Australia's national plan for organ donation.
Let me finish with this appeal to all Australians.
Take action and have a meaningful and informed discussion with your family about your wishes in relation to organ and tissue donation.
If you are not now on the organ donor list, please think about it and get your name on to it.
And I appeal to the nation's media: tell the stories of organ donation and the gift of life it can be.
These stories get people thinking and acting.
They really make a difference.
Each of us can play a role in this great cause.
And many Australians will enjoy happier, longer lives as a result. 


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose lands we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
Mr Speaker, a year ago, at the opening of the 42nd Parliament, I made a formal Apology to the indigenous peoples of Australia.
In particular to the Stolen Generations.
I did so on behalf of the Government and the Parliament of Australia.
I also said that the Apology would help to build a bridge of respect between Indigenous and other Australians, so that we could begin to turn the dream of reconciliation into a reality that we could see and feel and know.
That is why, on that day, I pledged that the Government would lead a new, national effort to close the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.
The gap in health, in housing, in educational opportunity and attainment, in employment.
And the obscenity of the 17-year gap in life expectancy.
These are ambitious goals.
Some said I should not set them, for fear that they could not be realised.
But my response was that unless we have agreed national goals that guide our national effort, we would be guaranteed of one thing  -  that we would achieve virtually nothing.
Too much time  -  too many decades -- have already been lost.
We must seize the opportunity that the Apology provides us.
Or else, put simply, we will lose that opportunity.
To speak fine words and then to forget them, would be worse than doing nothing at all.
To underline our accountability to the great task we have assigned ourselves, and to keep it fresh in the mind of the Parliament and the nation at large, I undertook also to report to Parliament at the beginning of each year on our progress in closing the gap.
And so, Mr Speaker, today I make the first of these statements that outlines the dimensions of the challenge we face and sets out our plan to close the gap.
Mr Speaker, I believe that the mark of this government is our commitment and capacity to address the immediate crises of today while also embarking on a program of reform to deal with the challenges of tomorrow.
That is why we must strain with every possible resource of government to deal with the impact of the global economic recession to reduce the impact on the Australian economy, businesses and jobs.
This is why we must continue to prosecute our long term reform agenda implementing the Education Revolution to drive long term productivity growth.
Why we must create a blueprint for nation-building to construct the infrastructure we will need for the 21st century.
Why we must deal with the blight of homelessness.
Act effectively  -  nationally and internationally  -  on the great challenge of climate change.
And act to close the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.
Indeed, in confronting a national economic emergency, the actions we take to stimulate and support our economy can also substantially contribute to dealing with our nation's long-term challenges.
And that includes the long-term challenge of closing the gap.
But this task is not merely a matter for government  -  important though the role of government is.
It is equally a matter for Indigenous people, for corporate Australia and for our whole community.
Unless there are relationships anchored in mutual respect and articulated through mutual responsibility  -  then the great enterprise of reconciliation on which we have embarked will fail.
Mr Speaker, we stand at an extraordinary moment in the history of Indigenous affairs.
A time of despair, but also a time of hope.
A time of great challenge, and equally a time of great opportunity.
Let us, always, start with hope.
We are so fortunate, as Australians, to have among us the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
Cultures that link our nation with deepest antiquity.
We have Aboriginal rock art in the Kimberley that is as ancient as the great Palaeolithic cave paintings at Altamira and Lascaux in Europe.
These paintings remain as part of the culture of Indigenous peoples today, expressing the traditions and spirituality of the Traditional Owners in the region.
We have a culture of Indigenous art that is alive, changing and a source of wonder to the world.
We have Indigenous dance -- both traditional and contemporary  -  that astonishes the world.
And music, a unique and beautiful music, that is celebrated all over the world.
Mr Speaker, there is a reason why the cultures of Indigenous Australia inspire such fascination.
And that is that they represent a unique way of thinking about the world.
A vision that over tens of thousands of years has risen out of the land, the power, the very being of our continent, Australia.
But my reasons for hope extend far beyond the depth and breadth of Indigenous creativity and culture.
Across the country, Indigenous communities are now trying new approaches to old problems.
There are Indigenous Australians making great strides in education and in the workforce.
The successes of ordinary people, sometimes against extraordinary odds  -  the stories that we don't often hear about.
Consider the fact that Australia now has 129 Indigenous doctors, and 129 medical students.
Or consider the success of the best Indigenous organisations.
The chairman of the Productivity Commission, a judge on last year's Indigenous Governance Awards, found that the best Indigenous organisations  -  and I quote -- ''outclass most mainstream organisations and enterprises in Australia.''
Or consider the work of Dr Chris Sarra, director of the Queensland Government's Institute for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Leadership and former principal of the Cherbourg primary school in Queensland  -  and the transformation of that local school.
These are just a few examples of change that is happening on the ground in Indigenous Australia.
Therefore, when we publicly reflect on the challenges facing Indigenous Australians  -  and they are many  -  let us have the habit of reflecting on what is going right as well as what is going wrong.
Nonetheless, we cannot ignore the despair that exists in too many Indigenous communities.
The chaos, violence and abuse that blight so many lives.
The absence of law-enforcement, of housing that is fit to live in, of basic services that the rest of the nation takes for granted.
It is indeed an obscenity that in this prosperous nation, Indigenous males die on average at the age of 59  -  18 years earlier than non-Indigenous males.
And Indigenous females only live to 65 on average  -  compared to 82 for non-indigenous females.
And while the mortality rate of Indigenous Australian babies is declining, it remains at more than 12 for every 1000 live births  -  a rate nearly three times that of non-indigenous infants.
Mr Speaker, in some outback Indigenous communities infection rates of the eye disease trachoma are as bad as they were 30 years ago, when Professor Fred Hollows, Professor Hugh Taylor and others began their celebrated campaign to eradicate the disease. 
And Australia is the only developed nation among 57 listed by the World Health Organisation that still has blinding trachoma.
In December, the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Education said she was ''hit in the guts' by the latest figures on the extent of illiteracy among Indigenous students in remote Australia.
Her words were strong, but justified  -  because in remote Indigenous communities, only 30 per cent of children in Year Three meet the minimum standards for literacy.
Mr Speaker, in recent years a sense of deepening despair had settled on much of Indigenous Australia.
Many people felt they were not consulted; that decisions about their welfare were made without reference to them.
That they had even become invisible to the nation.
While efforts had been made  -  well-motivated efforts.
For the nation at large it had all just become too hard.
The Apology opened the opportunity for a new relationship based on mutual respect and mutual responsibility between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australia.
Because without mutual respect and mutual responsibility, the truth is we can achieve very little.
But I also believe, Mr Speaker, that another great bridge was crossed in the events of February 13 last year.
And that was the death of ideology.
Let us not forget the great wave of goodwill that has been unleashed across our community this last year to tackle Indigenous disadvantage.
After two centuries of European settlement, I believe we have finally concluded that this great challenge transcends ideology  -  both of the left and of the right.
Mr Speaker, both Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians are eager to embrace a new approach.
An evidence-based approach, where two questions come before all others.
One, what is most needed to close the gap in each community?
And two, what works best to meet that need in each community?
Of course, the Apology has also raised expectations.
Expectations that change would be swift, results sudden.
But generations of Indigenous disadvantage cannot be turned around overnight.
Some say that little has happened in the year since the Apology.
But that is not the case.
Progress has been made.
Houses are being built.
Since the end of 2007, 80 houses have been completed or are nearing completion in remote Northern Territory communities.
We have negotiated four township leases in the Northern Territory.
This means we can start housing construction by mid-year, using the $672 million investment in Northern Territory housing.
Housing precinct leases have also been negotiated in five Territory communities.
In Tennant Creek, following a lease negotiated with the local Aboriginal corporation, pre-fabricated kitchens are being installed employing local Indigenous people.
There are also more police on the beat.
An extra 65 police have been deployed to remote Northern Territory communities that did not previously have a police presence.
With more night patrols, less alcohol consumption and more safe houses, families say they are feeling safer.
In the Northern Territory, 75 community stores have been licensed for income management, so women can buy fresh food and essentials for their families.
Almost 13,000 child health checks have also been undertaken.
In Western Australia, 121 people have voluntarily signed up to have their welfare payments income managed so money can be spent in the interests of families.
In Queensland, the Family Responsibilities Commission is making good progress with its community-led income management model.
Nationally, we have driven reforms through employment programs to give more Indigenous peoples the skills they need to get and keep a job.
In the past year, the foundations of our closing the gap agenda have been laid  -  and they are strong foundations.
Let me describe the four pillars of that agenda.
One, all our efforts in Indigenous policy must be governed by the sincere objective of closing the gap.
Our six targets are:
     * To halve the mortality gap between Indigenous children and other children under age 5 within a decade.
     * To provide access to early childhood education for all Indigenous four-year olds in remote communities within five years. 
     * To halve the gap in literacy and numeracy achievement between Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander students and other students within a decade.
     * To halve the gap between Indigenous and non-indigenous students in rates of Year 12 attainment or an equivalent attainment by 2020.
     * To halve the gap in employment outcomes between Indigenous and non-indigenous Australians within a decade.
     * And finally, to close the shameful gap in life expectancy between Indigenous and non-indigenous Australians within a generation.
Mr Speaker, based on these objectives, both levels of government  -  State and Federal, Liberal and Labor  -  agreed to a national investment of $4.6 billion over 10 years to programs aimed at closing each of these gaps.
To give one example, new funding of $1.94 billion, added to existing programs, means that over the next 10 years $5.5 billion will be spent on housing in remote Indigenous communities.
Good for the construction industry.
Good for business.
Good for jobs.
Good for Indigenous Australians.
It is the largest single outlay that government has ever made to address the chronic underinvestment in remote Indigenous housing.
Furthermore, the partnership of all Australian governments establishes a genuine national approach to closing the gap.
It establishes who will formulate policies, who will deliver programs, who will collect the data and who will evaluate that data.
It establishes a mechanism for measuring whether we succeed.
Whether  -  as is more likely  -  we partially succeed.
Or whether we fail.
And should either of the last two happen, we should have the courage and the maturity to admit it, and to adjust our policies and programs.
Above all, we will never take our eyes off hard data, or careful measurement of progress as we move forward.
For example, Indigenous year 12 attainment rates are 45 percent compared to 86 percent for non-Indigenous students.
And they have widened over the past five years.
Meeting our target of halving this gap by 2020 will require an improvement in Year 12 completion rates for Indigenous students of up to 2 percent each and every year.
We have in place the statistical collections that will allow us to measure progress each year.
If it becomes clear we are not on course, we will adjust our policies.
And the Council of Australian Governments Reform Council, assisted by specialist resources, will report each year on progress against each of our targets -- thereby providing an independent assessment of government commitment and progress.
The second pillar in our national strategy is resetting the relationship between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.
Mr Speaker, the Australian Government consulted widely with Indigenous groups in the lead-up to the national Apology.
This year we are moving towards establishing a national Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander representative body  -  to give Indigenous Australians the voice in national affairs that they lost.
We are undertaking extensive consultations with Indigenous communities on the nature of the representative body.
We are moving toward recognition of the First Australians in the Australian constitution.
But, Mr Speaker, our commitment to consultation will not prevent us from moving quickly, when necessary, to protect vulnerable people  -  especially, women, children and the elderly.
When manifest failures on the part of individuals and communities place others at risk of harm, we will act.
That is why we are continuing the Northern Territory Emergency Response, in order to stabilise some of the Northern Territory's most troubled communities.
And why we are continuing a program of income management in remote communities.
I know that income management is controversial, but we have maintained it for a simple reason  -  it has been shown to work in many communities.
It helps to protect vulnerable groups such as women, children and the elderly by enabling the purchase of food and other essentials.
Mr Speaker, that brings me to the third pillar of our national strategy for closing the gap, which is re-building the everyday social norms that underpin strong families and healthy communities.
We must address the dysfunctional culture of violence and neglect that blights some communities.
We must all work toward shared values.
Indigenous women and children must know they will be safe from violence and abuse.
Our investments to rebuild communities will help people increase their personal responsibility.
We will support people to be responsible parents, tenants, students and employees.
But this alone is not enough.
We need people to take responsibility for changing their lives, and those of people around them.
That is why we are trialling a program in six Northern Territory schools, in which welfare payments are conditional upon parents making sure their children attend school.
Mr Speaker, a growing number of Indigenous community leaders are determined to reject family violence, alcohol and drugs.
Leaders such as the brave women of Fitzroy Crossing who fought for alcohol restrictions.
And who, since the restrictions came into force in 2007, can report a 43 per cent drop in reported domestic violence and a 55 per cent drop in alcohol-related attendance at hospitals.
Leaders such as male health manager John Liddle, who read out a statement that had been signed by nearly 400 Aboriginal men at a Central Australian male health summit last July. The Inteyerrkwe Statement was a collective apology to women for past violence and abuse. 
It read:
''We acknowledge and say sorry for the hurt, pain and suffering caused by Aboriginal males to our wives, to our children, to our mothers, to our grandmothers, to our granddaughters, to our aunties, to our nieces and to our sisters...
''We also acknowledge that we need the love and support of our Aboriginal women to help us move forward.'
I believe that these men are part of the way forward for this country.
And that is our fourth pillar: the building of partnerships across all sectors of the Australian community to help to close the gap.
Where the wider community  -  including business, the education sector, sporting groups and the community sector at large  -  become partners in bringing about measurable change in Indigenous communities and Indigenous lives.
That is why the Australian Government is supporting the Australian Employment Covenant  -  an initiative led by mining executive Mr Andrew Forrest that seeks to engage corporate Australia in creating jobs for Indigenous Australians.
It is an ambitious plan, and it will be hard to achieve, but despite difficult economic times, 34 companies have already pledged to create 10,000 jobs under the Covenant. I thank them for it.
The Covenant builds on the great efforts many Australian companies have already made in Indigenous employment.
Companies such as Rio Tinto, Qantas, the NAB, the ANZ -- and the Indigenous Engagement Task Force of the Business Council of Australia, among others.
Mr Speaker, the Commonwealth is also contributing $20 million to provide scholarships for up to 2000 Indigenous secondary school students through the Australian Indigenous Education Foundation.
And we are providing $10 million over four years to support the expansion of the remarkable work of the Clontarf Academies  -  which now number 23, mainly in Western Australia and the Northern Territory.
I now turn to the building blocks of our strategy to close the gap.
Housing
Mr Speaker, if we are to improve health, education and employment outcomes we must start in the homes of Indigenous Australians.
The appalling state of housing in so many remote Indigenous communities is a major contributor to entrenched disadvantage.
Communities in which an average of 10 people  -  and up to 17 and even 20 people  -  live in one dwelling.
Houses where you cannot cook a meal, bathrooms where you cannot bathe a child, taps and toilets that don't work.
No child can do homework or even get a good night's sleep in such conditions.
No adult can properly hold down a job.
In addition, the Bureau of Statistics estimates that there are 3000 Indigenous people in remote areas who are homeless.
The Government is determined to bring major change to remote Indigenous housing.
From July we will begin to fund the construction of 4200 new houses - all connected to power, water and sewerage  -  in remote communities.
And 4800 houses that are either in shocking disrepair or uninhabitable will be upgraded.
That means up to 9000 Indigenous families will benefit.
We recognise that progress is slow.
Overcrowding and decades of inadequate or non-existent maintenance mean that houses fall quickly into disrepair.
But we are determined to tackle these challenges.
This includes making funding for communities conditional on the reform of land tenure arrangements that obstruct new housing investment.
Only with clear, well-functioning tenure arrangements will government agencies, housing authorities and private businesses make substantial housing investments in remote communities.
We are driving an aggressive land tenure reform agenda, which is necessary to underpin sustainable tenancy management, give tenants the assurance that routine repairs and maintenance will be carried out, and lay the foundations for economic development in remote communities.
For the first time, remote Indigenous citizens will have access to mainstream housing arrangements that public housing tenants in cities and towns take for granted.
And, over time, remote Indigenous citizens will have a realistic opportunity to own their homes.
In return, Indigenous tenants -- like all public housing tenants -- will be expected to pay rent on time, to cover the cost of any damage and to not disturb the peace of their neighbours. 
     * If people fail to pay their rent, action will be taken to deduct it from their accounts automatically as a condition of remaining.
     * People who damage their homes will be made to cover the cost of any damage and be required to enter into acceptable behaviour agreements.
     * People who allow unacceptable behaviours to occur on their premises will be subject to further action including orders by the Commissioner for Tenancies.
     * And people who wilfully fail to meet these commitments will face eviction.
Reform of public services
Mr Speaker, our housing strategy is closely linked to our plan to create a new model for service delivery in remote Australia.
We have chosen to focus on 26 selected remote locations  -  of which 15 are in the Northern Territory, and have already been identified for significant housing and infrastructure investment.
The goal is to invest sufficient money in these places to make a substantial difference, before we apply our reforms more widely.
Mr Speaker, these 26 communities will also be the first to benefit from the $291 million we are investing over six years in a new model for delivery of services to remote communities.
Unlike current arrangements  -  which too often fail to deliver basic services  -  the 26 locations will have one point of contact with government. 
One contact point to co-ordinate the delivery of housing, health, early childhood, welfare and education services. One contact point to deliver services to communities in a form that respects their culture and, where necessary, uses their languages.
To ensure our best chance of success, I am pleased to announce today the creation of a new position of Co-ordinator General for Remote Indigenous Services. It will be a statutory position, responsible to the Minister for Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs. The Co-ordinator General will have the authority to cut through bureaucratic blockages, and to help make sure services are delivered and conditionalities enforced. 
Too many government initiatives have failed in remote communities because essential preconditions have not been put in place, and planning has not been undertaken.
A Co-ordinator General will help ensure that instead of being planned and delivered in isolation, the delivery of government programs is coordinated and as a result, those programs deliver better results.
Health
I turn now to our health policy for Indigenous Australians.
Mr Speaker, today I am pleased to announce that the Commonwealth will invest $58.3 million over four years in order to fight chronic eye diseases such as trachoma.
Our objective must be clear: to eliminate trachoma among Indigenous Australians within a finite timeframe.
Trachoma currently affects approximately 20,000 Indigenous children. This should not be the case.
The investment we announce today will also target chronic middle ear infections and the risk of hearing loss which regrettably remains a real problem in Indigenous communities.
This investment will expand services to combat trachoma, train health workers for hearing screening, and provide extra ear and eye surgery, especially in remote and rural areas.
This funding comes on top of the $1.57 billion that the Commonwealth, State and Territory Governments have committed over the next four years to improve Indigenous health outcomes.
Mr Speaker, three-quarters of Australia's more than 500,000 Indigenous people live in urban and regional areas.
Their needs are central to our health agenda.
Too many Indigenous people across Australia die well before their time of treatable, chronic diseases.
Illnesses such as rheumatic heart disease, kidney disease, diabetes and cancer account for about two-thirds of premature deaths among Indigenous people.
Our strategy focuses on these and similar illnesses.
And it does so largely through the mainstream health system, because that is where 70 per cent of Indigenous people are treated.
Over four years, the Commonwealth will invest $806 million to improve the management of chronic disease.
We will appoint 160 new Indigenous health outreach workers to help improve Indigenous health outcomes.
We will offer financial incentives to GPs to encourage them to identify and better manage chronic illness among Indigenous people in their area.
Critically, we will fund two free health checks over the next four years for half the Indigenous adult population aged 15 to 65.
These checks are intended to identify chronic disease early  -  and will lead to more than 90,000 Indigenous people being provided with a program to help them manage their own illness.
Importantly, these health checks will provide governments with better aggregate data on the state of Indigenous health across Australia.
Smoking is one of the biggest single killers of Indigenous Australians.
A national Indigenous Tobacco Campaign will provide information, skills and support to enable people to quit smoking  -  using programs that have been shown to reduce tobacco use.
Early childhood development
Mr Speaker, we know that high-quality early childhood education is critical to the physical, emotional and intellectual growth of the child.
Over six years, the Commonwealth, State and Territory governments will invest $564 million to act on the critical needs of Indigenous infants and young children.
Indigenous babies are still twice as likely as other babies to be born with low birthweight, a condition linked to ill health and poor performance at school.
To improve the health of babies we need to work with pregnant mothers  -  especially teenage mothers.
We need to tackle conditions such as birth trauma, foetal growth, and foetal alcohol syndrome.
Conditions that are often linked to ill health or substance abuse.
The Commonwealth will fund the States and Territories to improve access to antenatal care for young Indigenous mothers.
We will create at least 35 new Indigenous Children and Family Centres that will provide support for families and pregnant mothers, as well as child care and early learning services.
To achieve lasting progress in closing the gap we must start at the earliest stages of the lives of Indigenous Australians.
These centres will play a vital role in addressing the earliest causes of disadvantage.
Schools
Mr Speaker, during the past year the Australian Government has made substantial commitments to reform the nation's schools, with a strong focus on the nation's most disadvantaged schools.
This reform agenda will particularly help Indigenous students, many of whom attend schools that are among the group of up to 1500 disadvantaged schools that will each get half a million dollars a year to build better quality in their schools.
The Government has announced a total investment of $1.1billion on all disadvantaged schools, $550 million to improve teacher quality, and more than $540 million for literacy and numeracy programs.
To qualify for funding, those schools must sign up to a set of outcomes  -  including our targets to halve the gaps in Indigenous literacy and numeracy achievement and in Year 12 attainment.
Workforce participation
Mr Speaker, at the time of the 2006 census, just 48 per cent of the Indigenous workforce-age population was in work  -  compared to 72 per cent of other workforce-age Australians.
To halve this gap to 12 percentage points by 2016, 100,000 more Indigenous Australians need to be employed -- 63 per cent more than were in work in 2006.
The Commonwealth, State and Territory governments have set a target of helping 13,000 Indigenous people to find and keep jobs.
We recognise this will be very difficult to achieve given the severity of the global economic recession.
But we are committed to working towards this goal in partnership with business and with State and Territory Governments.
The way forward
Mr Speaker, if we are to deliver on our nation's commitment to close the gap, we will need an unprecedented level of cooperation and coordination between Commonwealth and State and Territory governments.
That is why, later this year, a meeting of Commonwealth, State and Territory governments will focus on progress in our closing the gap agenda.
And from July 1, the new agreements we have struck with the State and Territory governments come into force.
That means we will prepare to build the new houses and early childhood centres and to start the new health programs.
Change is coming to Indigenous Australia.
And change is coming from Indigenous Australia.
The task ahead is difficult.
The transformation of communities and of lives will take many years.
And there will be many bumps and setbacks on the road.
The alternative is to do nothing.
We are determined to have a go.
In this country, the burden of history falls most heavily on the First Australians.
The disadvantage they have suffered for more than two centuries have placed great obstacles in our way.
But I also believe that we stand at a moment of great historical possibility.
Mr Speaker, let us seize the moment.
Let us work together, as Australians, with a sense of urgency but also of hope, knowing that we have the capacity and the compassion, the mutual respect and the mutual resolve to act, and so change our nation for the better.
Let us now begin.
Mr Speaker I now table the first annual report on Closing the Gap on Indigenous Disadvantage: The Challenge for Australia.
Mr Speaker, I thank the House.
The Closing the Gap on Indigenous Disadvantage: The Challenge for Australia report is available on the  Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs website


Ladies and gentlemen. More than 1.4 million men and women served our nation during the first and second world wars. This is an extraordinary number of people for a small country. 
The First World War helped shape our national character. The Second World War saw us defending our own shores. We have a proud record of fighting to defend our nation, our freedom and the freedom of others.
Our servicemen and women who served in both world wars as they do today, with courage, with resilience and with compassion.
These qualities not only shaped our past but they also steel us for the present and prepare us for the future. Those are the same qualities that we've seen again displayed in the lives and deeds of so many assisting in the Victorian bushfire effort. Courage in the face of danger, resilience in the face of adversity, and compassion to those around them who have suffered.
The Australians who served in world wars secured for our nation our safety. But they secured our safety and our security at a price. Along with our allies, many Australians made the ultimate sacrifice and never returned to their families, they never returned to our shores.
More than 100 thousand gave their lives in these two world wars. Ponder for a moment that number, 100 thousand. 100 thousand lives which in their impact on their families and their communities extended across the generations of the 21st century. An extraordinary sacrifice. Personal and national.
It is right therefore that we commemorate all those who served. All that they've achieved and all those who gave their lives. It's also right that we honour those who worked in Australia on the home front supporting the war effort.
We already have memorials commemorating World War I and World War II in the state capitals. and the Australian War Memorial born out of the first World War, opened during the second stands as a great monument to our past in these great conflicts. But I am delighted to be here to participate in this launch of a design for a dedicated World War I and World War II memorial on Anzac Parade. On our avenue of heroes, which is how I describe Anzac parade, we should commemorate the heroes of those two world wars.
I am pleased to announce today Richard Kirk Architects of Brisbane submitted the winning design for these memorials. I am sure Richard Kirk and his team will work the Memorials Development Committee to develop a timeless national monument for the appreciation of all Australians and to honour these brave men and women as we should.
Richard and his team are widely respected for their interest in the role well-made building play in the communities and environments they serve. And the memorial will play a crucial role in the life of our nation. It will join the other monuments on Anzac Parade and provide a focus for reflection and commemoration for those two world wars.
As you can see from the model it fits brilliantly within Walter Burley Griffin's plan for the national capital. The memorial will communicate an inspirational and timeless message that reflects the spirit, sacrifice and commitment of the Australian nation during these two great conflicts. I will remind us of those who served, it will remind us of those who supported the war effort on the home front and it will remind us that in rising to the challenges of war, we've forged a national character that gives us strength in difficult times.
There is something important about monuments, something that those associated with this memorials committee I'm sure themselves, have reflected on long and hard. As we visit and travel to see the great monuments to these wars, whether in Washington or London or another capital and see the importance which they have in telling their national stories about the participation in these great conflicts, we in Australia have embraced the same spirit of seeking in the monuments we construct and the buildings we fashion, a way of never forgetting them.
So that any school child, at any time, who takes the walk up Anzac Parade need not at that stage have opened a history book but they will see in the monuments that we've constructed in our nation's capital, monuments to heroism, bravery and those who forged our national character.
I congratulate the Memorials Development Committee on its vision and its commitment. I congratulate Richard Kirk and his team on their design being selected and I strongly encourage all Australians to offer their support to the development of this new great national monument for our nation's capital. I thank you.


As we confront the reality of a global economic recession, we must as a nation reaffirm the great strengths that we have, as well as recognise the great challenges that we face. 
Australia's strengths are formidable. Australia's economic strengths are formidable. Just as the Australian character in handling adversity is formidable.
In 2008, the Australian economy had stronger growth than any of the G7 economies and most recent figures suggest that Australia had the fifth highest growth rate of the 30 OECD members. Our unemployment rate is lower than all but one of the G7 and is the fourth lowest out of the 30 members of the OECD.
Our budget deficit to GDP ratio is the lowest compared to any of the G7 and among the lowest of the OECD. Our public net debt to GDP ratio is nearly one tenth that of the public net debt to GDP ratio of the OECD economies. Our banks' exposure to sub-prime mortgages represents less than 1 per cent of total mortgage assets. Our regulators are independent, strong and competent. Our consumers, notwithstanding the crisis, remain among the most confident in the OECD.
And our nation has taken early, decisive action to support the economy ahead of the curve. That is in large part why so far we have fared well against the rest of the developed world. 
As of the end of 2008, seventeen OECD economies had already entered recession; the US, Japan, Germany, the UK, Italy, Spain, the Netherlands, Singapore, Hong Kong, Sweden, Denmark, Finland, Hungary, Portugal, Turkey, Ireland and New Zealand.
Additionally, a further ten OECD economies have generated at least one quarter of negative economic growth; France, Canada, Korea, Norway, Austria, Belgium, Luxemborg, the Czech Republic, the Slovak Republic and Mexico
Given that 17 of the world's advanced economies are in recession and 27 have had at least one negative quarter of economic growth, it becomes harder and harder for Australia to single-handedly resist the global economic tide but we will continue to give it all that we have got.
Australia has only been one of four OECD economies not to be recession or to have a quarter of negative growth as a result of the crisis. Australia will need to draw on all these strengths to meet the unprecedented challenges we face as a nation. This is the first truly synchronised global economic downturn involving developed and developing economies since the war.
The impact is seen daily on global financial markets, in the real global economy and in rising global unemployment. The reality is an open economy like Australia cannot escape the impact of a global economic recession because there are no silver bullets.
But the Government can help to cushion the impact of the crisis on Australia. Through early action  -  being ahead of the curve. Through decisive action  -  because this is not the time for half measures. Through strong national leadership  -  because this is not the time to wait and see. And through strong national partnership with Australia's business leadership. Because the truth is we are all in this together.
It is therefore by acknowledging our strengths, by identifying the challenges we face and by prosecuting a clear strategy to steer us through, that we can see Australia through this current crisis. 
Some say we should just be talking about confidence but words without actions are hollow. Comforting words without a coherent strategy to underpin them are hollow. Talking about confidence without investing in the economy to build confidence is in fact a dead letter. 
The reason the Government is confident that we will steer Australia through this crisis is because of the concrete actions we have taken  -  which build on the great underlying strengths the national economy enjoys.These are the strong foundations on which we seek to build  -  foundations which underpin a rational basis for confidence, optimism and hope for the future.
Despite the challenges, despite the twists and turns that we will encounter; despite the setbacks that we will inevitably confront along the way, I have every confidence that not only will we come through this crisis but in doing so, we will build a stronger, tougher, more resilient Australia than ever before.
The global economic recession began in the United States, spread to Europe and then to Asia  -  and now impacts on all economies, including Australia. The distinctive feature of the current Global Financial Crisis, as George Soros himself has noted, is that it has emerged from inside “the system itself.” The crisis has its roots in a long period of global imbalances, lax regulation and easy credit  -  all turbo-charged by greed out of control.
The last decade has seen the growth of global imbalances on an historic scale. Current account positions of major economies have rapidly diverged in recent years. Excess saving in surplus economies has been recycled into deficit countries, creating a massive wave of liquidity which helped to push real interest rates to record lows.
These conditions gave rise to unprecedented growth of debt and credit in some developed countries  -  particularly in the United States. This also fostered a climate where investors were focussed increasingly on speculative gains, rather than long term productive investment.
The largest explosion of debt was in the financial sector. Financial sector debt grew from 22 per cent of GDP in 1981 to 115 per cent of GDP in 2007  -  a growth rate nearly ten times as fast as the growth of debt of non-financial corporations. And the balance sheets of many of the world's largest banks more than doubled in five years.
At the same time there was unprecedented growth in financial sector innovation. Banks developed the ‘originate and distribute' model  -  under which loans were passed on to securitisation companies that repackaged them into residential mortgage-backed securities and on-sold them into the global financial system.
Securitised credit increased five-fold from just over $500 billion in 1997 to nearly $2.5 trillion in 2007. As the economist Joseph Stiglitz has remarked, “many of America's big banks moved out of the ‘lending' business and into the ‘moving business'. They focused on buying assets and repackaging them, and selling them, while establishing a record of incompetence in assessing risk and screening for creditworthiness.” Unquote.
Other exotic financial instruments emerged in an attempt to spread the risk from the banks originating these loans  -  therefore spreading the contagion across the financial system. Credit default swaps, effectively insurance policies taken out on a debt, grew from less than one trillion to more than $60 trillion, the equivalent for around 100 per cent of global GDP.
And the core problem which emerged over the last decade, and which remains with us today, in the form of toxic assets, was this unprecedented explosion in credit and debt, which was left unconstrained by any national or effective international regulatory regime governing financial markets.
This was capitalism out of control.
This explosion of easy credit, combined with rapid financial innovation and the lack of regulatory constraints, led to financial collapse. The epicentre of the collapse was the “sub-prime” mortgage market  -  and the reckless loans written during the boom to uncreditworthy borrowers.
As interest rates began to rise, and property markets started to decline, many of these sub-prime borrowers were unable to meet their repayments. As sub-prime default rates rose, it became impossible to know the real value of securitised assets and the loans that they had been packaged into.
These became so called “toxic assets”  -  which became lodged on the balance sheets  -  not just of the originating financial institution but through the bank intermediation market  -  almost the entire financial system.
Official and semi-official estimates of potential losses on toxic sub-prime and related credit assets range from between $2.2 and $3.6 trillion. 
These toxic assets sitting on bank balance sheets in the United States and in Europe have become a poison in the bloodstream of the global financial system. Right now, toxic assets represent one of the greatest challenges to global economic recovery. This contraction in lending because of this problem is denying much needed credit to the global economy.
As President Obama said last week “there will be no real recovery unless we clean up the credit crisis” ... “the flow of credit is the lifeblood of our economy.”
Australian banks have very little exposure to toxic assets. That is one of the reasons why they are among the best performing banks in the world today. But Australian banks, Australian businesses and the Australian real economy are also impacted by the global credit crunch that toxic assets in the major global banks have caused. And that makes the consequences for Australia very real indeed.
If the flow of global credit is restricted to Australia because of the impact of toxic assets on the major global banks' balance sheets, then economic growth is choked off and unemployment rises. Then Australian families have a harder time getting credit to purchase goods and services and so demand falls. And Australian businesses have a harder time getting credit to buy equipment, expand their operations, and grow their business, and so investment falls. 
That is why the challenge of dealing decisively with toxic assets in the major global banks is so important both to the global economy and to the Australian economy. Furthermore, if toxic assets in the major global banks are not dealt with, the ability of those banks to lend to provide also, normal flows of credit around the world is undermined  -  and with what scarce global credit remains, it is then repatriated to try and repair the balance sheet in the home jurisdiction. That in turn means that the normal supplies of foreign credit to Australian banks, businesses and consumers is reduced.
To put this into statistical context for Australia, foreign banks' lending represents up to thirty per cent of the debt provided to the $252 billion commercial property sector in this country, which in turn employs some 150,000 Australians.
The consequences of toxic assets on the global economy are also stark. 
The International Monetary Fund has estimated that without action to address bank balance sheets, global credit growth in 2009 could fall by an annualised 6.1 per cent  -  or a combined fall of at least US$3.9 trillion.
On the basis of historical ratios between credit and growth, a credit decline of this magnitude would be associated with a fall in economic activity of around US$2.1 trillion on an annualised basis or 3.5 per cent of global GDP  -  significantly explaining the IMF's pessimistic growth forecast for 2009.
This very directly affects global recovery, global growth, and jobs around the world, including here in Australia.
That's why governments in the US and Europe acting decisively to toxic assets is so critical to global economy recovery.
Since coming to office, the Australian Government has been confronted with a global economic crisis which began in US banks, spread to Europe, Japan and China and now affects economies right across the world, including Australia.
What started as a crisis brought about by unrestrained greed in under-regulated financial markets is now impacting the real economy, real jobs and families across the world, including Australia.
In responding to the global economic crisis, the Government has taken decisive policy action to cushion Australia from the full impact of the crisis. The Government has done this through a five part economic and fiscal policy framework.
One: acting to maintain the stability of domestic financial markets because private credit flows are essential for economic recovery.
Two: injecting economic stimulus through a nation building plan to support growth and jobs in the short term and in a manner which allows the Government to continue to prosecute a long-term strategy of economic reform to build long term productivity growth.
Three: providing additional support for those who lose their jobs, through no fault of their own, to maintain existing skills or to retrain with new skills in preparation for when the economy recovers.
Four: implementing a medium term economic and fiscal policy strategy which maintains borrowing and spending discipline.
Five: engaging with other governments to help shape critical global decisions and to shape those decisions on the core problems which have caused the global economic recession  -  namely, restoring global private credit markets to restore private credit flows to the real economy.
Australia's banks remain strong. The Chairman of the Australian Prudential Regulatory Authority advised the Government yesterday that:
“Though the environment has become more difficult, APRA remains confident that the fundamental strength of the Australian banking system will continue to assert itself...The Australian banking system remains sound and well capitalised...”
To maintain stability in the financial sector, on 12 October 2008 the Government took the unprecedented step to guarantee all Australian deposits and the term funding of Australian banks.
Before the guarantee, the confidence of Australian depositors was beginning to be undermined by developments in the global banking system. We acted to restore that confidence and for the first time in Australia's history, the Government acted to explicitly guarantee all deposits.
Furthermore, before the guarantee, Australian banks had increasing difficulty raising funds offshore.
By September last year, raisings had fallen to $1.7 billion, down from $13 billion, a month earlier in that year. In October there were no raisings at all.
The Guarantee had an immediate effect on inter-bank lending by Australia's banks.
Australian banks have now raised more than $75 billion under the guarantee the Government provided  -  funds critical to ensuring access to the funds needed to lend to Australian businesses and households to support growth and jobs.
The second arm of the Government's strategy has been to pursue an active policy of macro-economic stimulus to support economic growth and jobs  -  again until such time as the private economy recovers on the back of the recovery in turn of private credit markets.
This has meant a coordinated approach to monetary and fiscal policy.
Interest rates have been cut by 400 basis points since September to stimulate demand.
The Government has reinforced this with strong fiscal policy.
In May last year the Government used the budget to build a strong $21.7 billion surplus as a buffer for tough times.
Those tough times came sooner than many predicted.
Drawing on this surplus, the Government took initial action in October through its first stimulus package, when it became clear that the world economy was slowing rapidly. We judged that the risk of not acting quickly was greater than the risk of acting early. 
The Economic Security Strategy of last October provided an immediate boost to demand while helping families, pensioners, and first home buyers.
This was evident through data showing that retail trade has subsequently risen by 3.8 per cent in December 2008  -  a remarkable figure given the state of the global economy and the depths of consumer confidence globally.
The Economic Security Strategy has also helped employment. As Deutsche Bank Chief Economist Tony Meer has said, in response to the January Labour Force figures:
“Retailers [were] ... bolstered by the cash-bonus-inspired strength in sales, they have responded in January by retaining higher than usual post-Christmas staff levels”.
And the Economic Security Strategy has had a significant impact also on the housing market.
Housing Finance data from the ABS shows that in November 2008 the number of first-home buyers increased by 21.3 per cent - pushing their share of new loans to 25.4 per cent - the highest since December 2001.
Since October, the Government in December and in February this year, made further stimulus announcements totalling some $47 billion to support the economy and jobs for the year ahead and to build for our long term future.
In December we announced a $4.7 billion plan for infrastructure  -  roads, rail, ports and other critical infrastructure.
In February the Government announced the $42 billion Nation Building and Jobs Plan.
This plan is expected to support up to 90,000 jobs over each of the next two years. The plan is expected to boost GDP by around one half of one per cent in 2008-09 and by around three quarters of per cent to one per cent in 2009-10.
I would like to publicly acknowledge the business community for their constructive contributions to the development of elements of the package.
ACCI played an important role in promoting the temporary business investment allowance, which we announced first in December and then expanded to 30 per cent in February.
ACCI recognised early that, and I quote them, “investment allowances have been an important feature of efforts to support economic growth which in turn will assist job retention”.
Around 70 per cent of expenditure under the Nation Building and Jobs Plan is focused on initiatives to build prosperity for the future.
This includes the largest school modernisation program in Australia's history, investment in building public housing and improvements in energy efficiency across Australia. The key is this: to invest in infrastructure, build for the future, but to provide stimulus for jobs in the economy in the here and now. That is what it is all about.
Supporting those who lose their jobs: while we have taken decisive action to try to limit job losses, we have also taken action to help those who lose their jobs through no fault of their own.
In October, the Economic Security Strategy included $187 million to create 56,000 new training places for the 2008-09 Productivity Places Program.
In February, the Government added a further 10,000 training places specifically for those made redundant.
The Government has also announced $145.6 million further to provide a pathway for out of trade apprentices and trainees to stay connected to the workforce and to maintain their training. This program will benefit up to 58,000 out of trade apprentices and trainees.
More recently, the Government announced nearly $300 million in additional investment in employment services and $75 million to assist newly retrenched workers accessing training.
These targeted investments will ensure any Australian worker made redundant will now receive immediate and personalised assistance to help them back into the workforce.
Fiscal strategy: the Government's approach to fiscal stimulus and temporary borrowing has been broadly supported by industry, unions and international economic agencies and most economic commentators.
ACCI Director Greg Evans has noted: “Such is the scope of our current economic difficulties that this package ...
- referring to the Government's stimulus package  - 
“... is absolutely essential. The size of the package ... is appropriate [and] we recognise and accept that a temporary deficit is required to fund the program.”
The BCA has said: “The Budget will almost certainly move into deficit at some point over the coming two years. The BCA considers this appropriate for the economic times.”
The regulators have also supported the Government's policy of acting early to support economic growth and jobs, rather than waiting for the global recession to hit.
As the Governor of the Reserve Bank has said “...the longer you wait, the more ammunition you will end up having to use.”
So let us be clear. The International Monetary Fund, the Reserve Bank of Australia, the Business Council of Australia, the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry, the Australian Industry Group, the Council of Small Business Organisations, the Housing Industry Association, the Australian Property Council and the Australian Federation of Construction Contractors, have all supported the Government's Economic Stimulus Strategy. 
The Government has also been clear cut that the actions we take today must be also part of a medium term fiscal framework. The Government's consistent policy has been to keep the budget in balance over the economic cycle. The Government's plan to return the budget to surplus is a straightforward plan. Our economy, once our economy recovers, we'll cut spending to ensure the budget gets back to surplus. But if the Government pulls out too early, you delay the recovery, lose more jobs and make it harder to get back to surplus.
Our policy is that when the Australian economy recovers to above trend, the Government will take action to return the budget to surplus.
By first, allowing the level of tax receipts to recover naturally as the economy improves, while maintaining the Government's commitment to keep taxation as a share of GDP below the 2007-08 level on average.
And second, holding real growth in spending to two per cent a year until the budget returns to surplus. Of course, the current collapse in government revenues caused by the global economic crisis, and the need temporarily to stimulate the economy, will have a temporary impact on Government borrowing.
The Government will use future surpluses to repay temporary borrowings.
The critical point is this: temporary and targeted economic stimulus, supported by temporary budget deficits and a temporary increase in Government borrowings represents the only responsible course of action to make up for the collapse in private sector activity in the Australian economy that has been caused by the global economic crisis.If the Government instead had decided to sit on its hands, the impact on the Australian economy, businesses and jobs would be much, much worse. That is a simple fact. 
This is an unassailable fact which any honest person contributing to the public policy debate in Australia much accepts.
Engagement with other governments.
The fifth element of Government's economic policy framework is international  -  based on the Government's recognition that whatever actions Australia takes domestically to cushion us from the impact of the global economic recession are fundamentally shaped by the actions of other governments (individually and collectively)  -  both to stabilise their financial institutions and to stimulate global growth until private credit markets recover.
This brings us back to the core economic challenge of how major global banks and the governments responsible for regulating those banks, deal now with the core problem of toxic assets on those banks' balance sheets. 
There can be no long term economic recovery until we get global private credit flowing again. 
This is the core problem in the United States and in Europe where toxic assets continue to impede the restoration of private credit flows. 
Because of the size of the European and US banking systems, it also matters for the rest of the world. And therefore it matters for Australia as well.
That is why the challenge of toxic assets must be addressed at the forthcoming G20 summit in London on the 2nd of April. Sick and unhealthy assets have the capacity to affect healthy assets and banks  -  it's like a virus which, if left untreated, can easily spread.
We now know the cause of the virus. It is now up to the G20 (and those governments within the G20 responsible for regulating impaired banks within their jurisdiction) to now treat the virus. 
This is a difficult challenge. 
We at present are working hard with other G20 members to find an effective global framework for dealing with this core problem.
Just as we are working with other governments on coordinated fiscal stimulus and on strengthening the regulatory framework for the financial system for the future. 
The Obama Administration recently announced its Financial Stability Plan and other governments have announced their plans to restore the health of their banking systems. 
It is essential that design and implementation of these plans is done not in isolation by each country, but in cooperation with each country. 
Proper coordination is important for global confidence at a time when confidence in markets and the economy is so poor. 
Cooperation is also important to share technical expertise on challenging questions like valuing assets and dealing with financial entities that operate in multiple jurisdictions. 
Cooperation is important for emerging economies  -  who cannot deal with these problems on their own. Cooperation is vital because we must avoid financial nationalism  -  policy actions which encourage banks to reduce their overseas lending.
And cooperation is important to ensure that we do not engage in a race for finite global capital. Absent cooperation, as governments take unprecedented steps to secure their financial systems, the scope for financial protectionism is large.
Financial protectionism (intentional or otherwise) has every danger of becoming the new Smoot Hawley tariff of the 21st Century. 
Smoot Hawley was introduced as a protectionist measure in the United States in the 1930s against the physical trade in goods. 
Far worse, in the current century, given the dimensions of global financial interdependence, would be any new form of protectionism which goes to the very arteries of the global economy. 
While Australian banks are not affected by toxic assets, several countries, including Australia, are working towards principles to guide affected governments in their response to toxic assets in their banks.
The core elements of these principles include the following:
First, all weak and all systemically significant financial institutions should be subject to stress testing. The public and governments need to know with confidence that the assets on bank balance sheets are sound. 
Second, all non-viable banks must be closed. Keeping insolvent banks alive is itself systemically damaging. 
Third, all toxic assets on bank balance sheets must be neutralised. This can be achieved by creating a publicly owned asset management company as the Republican Administration did in the United States in the 1980s to deal with the savings and loan crisis; or publicly-funded insurance mechanisms; or other effective mechanisms deploying public and private capital to ring-fence and then remove toxic assets.
This needs to be done quickly and comprehensively, and may require compulsion. 
Fourth, the price of bad assets should be derived from a transparent and simple formula. A simple rule  -  transparent, easily understood, and one which can be implemented quickly. 
Fifth, it is essential that the private sector and governments and international financial institutions work closely together on delivering this outcome. 
Sixth, a critical element must be to recapitalise banks  -  so they have the capital they need to then lend and to reopen the arteries of credit. 
Finally, once adequately capitalised, banks must formally agree to maintain regulated levels of lending in return for Government support through sovereign guarantees on deposits and/or interbank lending. This set of principles must apply to all globally, systemically significant banks with toxic asset problems today.
Given the differences in domestic institutional structures, it is up to individual national governments to decide on the precise model through which they would apply any agreed framework of international principles such as the one I have just outlined. 
But it is essential that action is rapid, comprehensive and global.
The G20 Summit on the 2nd of April will provide an opportunity for concrete cooperation in the common interest of individual countries and the global economic good. 
I repeat  -  dealing effectively with toxic assets and the balance sheets of globally significant banks is fundamental to the recovery of private credit markets and therefore, to medium to long term economic recovery  -  across the global economy and for the Australian economy. 
That is why it is core business for us all.
To conclude, there is little doubt that 2009 will be a tough year for the global economy.
It will be a tough year for Australia.
The Government remains determined to take whatever other action is necessary to help steer Australia through the current crisis. 
Further temporary interventions may be necessary in credit markets. Further stimulus may be necessary through investment in long-term economic infrastructure. Further measures will be necessary to support those who lose their jobs, apprenticeships and traineeships through no fault of their own, where once again Government will have a responsibility to provide appropriate support until the economy recovers.
Just as we must never lose sight of the fact that the real long term recovery path lies in coordinated international action, both at the London Summit and beyond.
The carnage in the stock market in the United States overnight is a further reminder that notwithstanding the actions we take here in Australia, in a global recession we are always subject to global events. 
That is why Australia must act at home to stimulate the economy but also act abroad to contribute to the global policy response. 
Now is not the time to sit back and watch this crisis unfold on CNN. 
Now is the time for Australia to engage in the global response. 
Australia won't solve this crisis alone  -  but nor can the global crisis be solved without the contribution of Australia and other nations who represent important parts of the global financial system.
Our first national priority must always be supporting Australian jobs and the Australian economy - but pursuing a global response is a critical part of that national priority. 
In the year ahead, despite the challenges we face, because of the strength of our strategy and the calibre of our people, I maintain absolute confidence in our economy's capacity to come through this crisis. 
Let us remind ourselves afresh of the great strengths that we possess. 
The strengths of our institution.  The strength of so much of our business leadership. The strength of our community, which possesses a resilience which in times past has seen us through times of great adversity. And a resilience which we will must now draw upon for the future as well.
The truth is we are all in this together: government, business, unions, the wider community. 
Just as Australia is in this with the rest of the world. 
But together, guided by a clear-headed strategy and enabled by the resolve of our people, we will see Australia through this crisis together  -  a stronger, more resilient and more productive nation than ever before. 


This is a great and good day for the Australian Defence community and for the Australian Defence family.
I'm sure the gentle rolling hills of Bungendore were far from the mind of General Sir John Monash when he led our forces at the Battle of Hamel, 90 years ago on the Western Front. The landscape he confronted in Northern France would certainly have looked very, very different from this and certainly very, very different after almost four years of trench warfare in that bloody conflict.
Yet we are here today to open these Headquarters of the Joint Operations Command in large part because of the lesson demonstrated near the town of Hamel in Northern France in July of 1918. The lesson of Hamel is the simple truth about coordinated military operations - that our defence forces are far more effective, vastly more effective when they work together. And it is this lesson that inspires this Joint Operations Command.
In the space of only 90 minutes at Hamel, the German Forces were defeated through an innovative strategy. A strategy that coordinated artillery, armour, infantry and aircraft, deploying a vast army of the brave men and women of the Australian, British and United State armed forces.
The lesson of Hamel was used to even greater effect in the Battle of Amiens later that year. It is a lesson that helped change the course of that war. The success of this insight of coordinated military action, of coordinated military operations that represented the principal reason why years later the British Commander Field Marshall Montgomery described Sir John Monash as the best General on the entire Western Front.
We should be proud of Monash. You in Army are proud of Monash, you in the armed forces are all proud of Monash, the nation at large should be proud of Monash, for his legacy lives on.
Monash had shown the great and critical importance of coordinating strategic and tactical elements of warfare, to give troops in the field clear direction and support. The Joint Operations Command grows out of the lessons learnt from this pioneering military history and this lesson is even more important in the 21st century than it was almost a century ago on the Western Front.
The importance of coordination today is especially critical given the complex challenges in our current strategic environment. Our armed forces must be ready to respond to a wide range of contingencies; civil strife, natural disasters and armed conflict.
The demands on our military are great. The Australian Defence Force is in a period of sustained high operational tempo. Today the Australian Defence Force is deployed in some 15 operations overseas and at home. And as Prime Minister of Australia I am proud of each and every member of the Australian Defence Force in each and every one of these operations because they do the name of Australia enormous pride.
These operations range from confronting terrorism in Afghanistan, to providing much needed support and help to the thousands of people whose lives have changed forever because of Saturday's Victorian bushfires. The ADF's joint taskforce involving up to nearly 900 ADF members at its peak has done an outstanding job in Victoria providing specialist and emergency support in response to the worst natural disaster our nation has ever faced. The ADF's response to this tragedy underscores the enormous contribution that our armed forces continue to make to Australia both at home and abroad.
The challenge of coordinating a massive range of recovery and reconstruction operations after so many towns lost everything - power, water, communications and other infrastructure, and an estimated 2,000 and more homes - has test the mettle of all involved but they have done well. Though the challenge lies ahead of us still.
The scale of this most recent challenge is indicative of the complexity of some of the challenges that the staff at these headquarters will be wrestling with day after day as they confront the strategic challenges of planning and coordinating our nation's defences.
The fundamental work for the nation is to provide for the security of the nation and we pay tribute to all who are engaged in providing for the security of our nation, Australia. Because for any Government of Australia the most fundamental responsibility is this: to maintain this nation's national security and its political sovereignty. And so therefore it is with great pleasure that I am here today at the opening of this marvellous facility.
Headquarters Joint Operations Command, HQ-JOC, will be a central element of the Government's commitment to our comprehensive whole-of-government national security arrangements.
As we have seen, contemporary threats to Australia's national security are increasingly fluid and complex. Meeting these threats will require an equally sophisticated response whether it involves counter-terrorism operations off-shore or assisting civilian authorities at home.
The recent terrorist attack in Pakistan reminds us all that terrorism is alive and well, from Afghanistan, Pakistan, the Horn of Africa and beyond. And therefore we must remain vigilant against terrorism and the threat of terrorist attacks everywhere.
The Government is committed to securing Australia and ensuring that the spectrum of national security challenges we face do not threaten our way of life. We can no longer view national security tasks through a narrow spectrum that relies on the designation of tasks to individual government agencies or to a particular branch or sub-branch of the military. In short we need to approach emerging challenges as an integrated national security community across all levels of government.
HQ-JOC will help us to achieve that integration. This place will be the focus of joint services operations and it will help the ADF to work with other agencies engaged in national security tasks when required like border protection, active engagement in operations abroad and responding to national disasters at home and abroad.
The establishment of HQ-JOC will not only enhance coordination across national security agencies, it will also help promote a cohesive and cooperative national security culture. The development of this national security culture will be essential in responding effective to the range of challenges likely to be faced by Australia now and into the future.
These headquarters are therefore important to the nation's future. Important to the building of a more secure Australia. Important to the effectiveness of our operations at home and abroad. And important to all those who serve proudly in the Australian Defence Forces.
There is one other respect in which this facility is important. It will bring new families into this area and bring a new stage to the history of Bungendore, Captain's Flat, Major's Creek, Womboin and other towns and hamlets in this region.
Before officially opening Headquarters Joint Operations Command, I'd also like to formally associate myself with the tribute just paid now by the Chief of the Defence Force to the source of this great facility's inspiration; General John Baker.
General Baker was a fine Australian. He was a fine military officer. He served his country with distinction in Vietnam and in command roles in Australia. He also was a military leader who understood that our defence forces must be led across the forces. He had always a whole-of-defence view. He was from the army, but he was army, air force, navy. He was defence.
As we already heard he was instrumental in shaping the ADF's high level command structures. This facility is very much the embodiment of General Baker's dedication, professionalism and commitment to excellence and a proper reflection of his professional spirit and we honour him. We are indebted to his vision.
Through the successful operation of these Headquarters, General Baker's legacy to our nation will endure.
And it is therefore with great honour and in the presence of Mrs Baker and so many of her family here today that I invite Mrs Baker to unveil the bust of General Baker as I declare the General John Baker Complex officially open.
[ends]


Salaam Alaykum.
Ahlan wa Sahlan si Australia.
Today is a day of historic significance.
Your Excellency, your visit is the first ever by a Prime Minister of your country to Australia. It is therefore a day of great celebration. It is a day which has become therefore a great symbol of all that your country has achieved in the face of great turmoil in recent years, that we can now welcome you to Australia.
This building in which we meet is the symbol of Australian democracy and it is proper that we should host you here because you represent through your personal courage a continuing but increasingly successful struggle to establish a democracy in a place that was the cradle of civilisation.
Many of us in Australia studied the history of ancient Mesopotamia, studied the history of Ur of the Chaldees, the history of what was called the Fertile Crescent. To see this modern state and democratic state of Iraq emerge from such and ancient and revered history to join the society and community of nations today is indeed a good and a great thing.
Mr Prime Minister, I met you for the first time in Baghdad in December 2007, shortly after I came to office. Your own personal courage in acting against the Shia militia in 2008 was a turning point in convincing the people of Iraq that you led a government for all Iraqis.
Your and nation and its people have been through extraordinary difficulties and your leadership has been a critical element in helping your nation overcome these difficulties.
Of course great challenges still lie ahead. Just this week we have seen in Baghdad terrible, terrible suicide bombings. We and all countries of the world condemn all such terrorist acts and admire you, Prime Minister, for your continuing courage in standing up to these terrorists.
And I can say Prime Minister that in the midst of continuing challenges in your country, the Government and people of Australia particularly appreciated your sending your condolences and those of the Iraqi people following the recent tragic bushfires in Victoria.
Prime Minister, I am pleased that you have been able to visit Australia so we could discuss today how Australia and Iraq can work in the partnership in the years that lie ahead because I think the time has come for Australia and Iraq to begin a new phase in our relationship.
Through our discussions today, we are settling the framework for a new relationship that is broadly based and not simply focused on military and security relations.
That is why today we agreed to enhance cooperation in six key areas  -  what we described as the six new pillars of the Iraq-Australia relationship. Agriculture, resources and energy, trade, public health, training and research and of course security.
And I am pleased that our officials have been busy at work today since you and I in our discussions this morning agreed that these would be the six pillars of the new broadened relationship between our two countries, our two economies and our two peoples.
I am pleased that this evening, following dinner, we will both sign the document which our officials have worked on today.
By my calculation this agreement has been concluded within eight hours of its conception - that may be a record in global diplomacy, which says something about the speed with which global diplomacy normally operates.
Prime Minister, I was particularly pleased today that we agreed to enhance our cooperation in agriculture.
Iraq as we know is an ancient home of farming.
It is at the heart of the Fertile Crescent that saw great developments in agriculture that spread throughout the world.
Today Australia too is a proud innovator in agriculture and given that we both face dry climates, we have much to learn together and we have much to gain from working together.
We already have 120 Iraqi students in Australia on scholarships learning about world's best practice in livestock management, in environmental management and in agricultural administration.
Our aim is simple  -  to provide a group of specialists for your country with the skills to develop a strong agricultural sector.
It is an important part of our development assistance cooperation with your nation. It is also, I believe, an important foundation for the commercial relationship in agriculture between our two countries as well.
Prime Minister, your desire for your country to obtain food security for your people is understandable, legitimate and one to be supported. We in Australia wish to be partners with you in securing that ambition for your country and for your people.
Today we agreed on a new $17 million program that adds another strand to this cooperation, this cooperation in agriculture.
At the same time, we are also looking to develop our economic links more broadly.
Australia and Iraq can do a lot more together. Australian resource companies can help Iraq develop its natural resources and Iraqis are welcome to learn from what expertise we have to offer.
Furthermore we also have expertise in design and construction in many areas.
This evening, Prime Minister, I was pleased to be able to introduce to you representatives of the Australian design and construction industry who have already tendered successfully and hopefully in the future will tender successfully again for the construction of public hospital facilities in your country, as you build your public health system.
We also look more broadly for greater cooperation in the overall area of education, training and research. At the high-tech end of the spectrum Australian firms have also much to offer our friends in Iraq.
Whether it is in the field of border surveillance or health systems, Australian firms are world beaters in their fields. There is ample scope for greater economic and trade relationships between our nations, and our two economies.
Prime Minister your nation has been through troubling times. But under your leadership, it is emerging into a much brighter future. And you are to be congratulated for it.
Before we spoke of our aspirations for our wider region - yours in the Middle East, ours in East Asia and the Pacific but more broadly in terms of our engagement with the world.
Our common aspiration was expressed in an Arabic expression which runs something like this  -  Al-Sadieq wallah adu waheed. Which for the fluent Arabic speakers in the Australian parliament of whom there are none, hence my confidence in saying what I just said, means ‘to have 1,000 friends but not a single enemy'. This is a great aspiration for a government leader and for a leader of a new democracy in so troubled a region as the wider Middle East.
Australia wants to be a partner with you, Prime Minister, and a partner with the people of Iraq in building that future. These are not just fine diplomatic sentiments as you would expect on a formal state occasion, these are very much the practical aspirations of the Australian Government and the Australian people in working with you in the new six pillars of our economic relationship, this new phase in the Iraq-Australia relationship.
Today we took important steps towards achieving that goal.
We now have a framework for our vital work together in the future.
Prime Minister I thank you for your cooperation and please know this -personally and to members of your delegation, you are indeed welcome guests in our country, Australia.
I thank you.


It's so good to be back home.
It's good to be back home in Queensland.
And it's good to be back amongst many old friends.
And one of those friends I've known for 20 years.
Now that's a fair slice of time.
You do get to know somebody over 20 years.
We worked together under Wayne Goss.
Since then, she's worked as a Minister for Communications, Education, Treasury, Deputy Premier and now Premier.
That friend is Anna Bligh.
A good person.
A strong leader.
With a no nonsense, practical down-to-earth approach.
Someone who speaks her mind  -  and in my experience, speaks her mind forcefully.
And a person refined through the fire of public office.
Friends, we live in a time when leadership such as this is now put to the test.
We live in a time where there are no easy choices.
Only hard choices.
Since Anna has become Premier and I Prime Minister, we have seen the onset of the greatest global economic crisis, the greatest global economic recession in three quarters of a century.
For the first time since the Second World War, the global economy will shrink in 2009.
For the first time since the war, global trade will shrink in 2009.
More than 30 global banks have either collapsed or been bailed out by their home governments.
Stock markets around the world have lost more than half of their value in the last year.
Superannuation funds have lost more than one fifth.
And no country, including Australia, and no state, including Queensland, is immune from this global economic storm, as jobs are smashed across the world.
Virtually every political leader in the world recognises the size and seriousness of the global economic recession except Mr Springborg who says it's “peripheral to what's happening in Queensland”, and Mr Turnbull who says it's all “overhyped”.
How can you begin to deal with the threat that now confronts Australia and Queensland, created by the global economic recession, if Mr Springborg as Premier, says the warnings about the seriousness of the threat are “absolute nonsense”?
Friends, there are two possible responses to the global economic recession and its impact on Australia and Queensland jobs.
You can either sit back, wait and do nothing and leave people to face the full force of the global economic storm unprotected as the Liberals and Nationals recommend.
Or you can act decisively, to stimulate the economy, to support jobs, to reduce the impact of the storm - as the Queensland Government is doing.
That is the absolute choice here in these difficult and dangerous times.
Let every Queensland family fend for themselves against the storm, or instead have a government that steps into build our defences against the storm - because we are all in this together.
Friends, together with Anna Bligh I'm in the business of building our defences against the global economic storm and its impact on Queensland jobs.
That's why we're working together to invest up to $2.5 billion in every one of Queensland's 1,449 primary schools.
To the biggest school modernisation program in Australia's history, to boost jobs and to build better schools for the future.
That's why we've worked together to invest in building state of the art trades training centres across 85 of Queensland's secondary schools, to boost jobs and to build the skills we need for the future  -  with more to come.
That's why we've worked together to invest in 48 thousand new computers in Queensland's secondary schools  -  with more to come.
And in partnership with Queensland, we've now created places for nearly 14 thousand people in Productivity Places programs, undertaking pre-apprenticeships, and out of trades apprenticeship, to help our young people through the global recession and to build the skills we will need for economic recovery.
Here's to the practical stuff of governments that we do together to reduce the impact of the storm, not just to stand back and say I have no responsibility at all to protect people from the storm.
The Liberals and Nationals have an approach which says that somehow they have no responsibility to defend us from the onslaught from the global economy.
We have a different approach.
Friends, that's Anna's plan and our plan to work together to steer Queensland through these stormy economic seas that lie ahead.
Mr Springborg offers a different plan in three parts.
To deny there is a global economic threat to jobs here at home.
To refuse to support practical projects to reduce the damage to Queensland jobs.
And worse, to add to the damage, by deliberately throwing 12 thousand Queenslanders out of jobs, by cutting $1 billion from Queensland's public services.
I say to Mr Springborg  -  wrong, wrong, and wrong.
Mr Springborg's policy of sacking another 12 thousand Queenslanders in the middle of a global economic recession is not just risky, it's not just reckless, it's downright dangerous.
I ask Mr Springborg this  -  how on earth can you credibly tackle unemployment by deliberately making another 12 thousand people unemployed?
Friends, Queensland and Australia are now staring at the eye of the global economic storm.
Now is not the time to risk an unstable minority government led by a man whose explicit policy is to make another 12 thousand people unemployed.
Now is the time for a Premier capable of strong leadership and a practical plan to boost jobs, and build the infrastructure we need for our future.
Friends, please welcome one such leader, Anna Bligh, Premier of Queensland.


When Brian was introducing me before and said that I'd be treated with due courtesy, I thought I'd come to the wrong establishment; knowing something of the history of this establishment.
But I was also handed as I walked up a note from a hopeless Irish romantic which reads as follows:
Dear Mr Rudd, if possible could you wish my wife Angela a happy 20th wedding anniversary? We got married on the 16th of March 1989 in Dublin, Ireland and emigrated to Australia two weeks later. Thank you. Miles Warren.
Miles Warren  -  stand up. (Applause)
Well ladies and gentleman, it is customary on St Patrick's Day for politicians to lay claim to their Irish ancestry, however tenuously. To wax lyrical on the bonds of history that tie Australia - and in fact one in 10 Australians who come from Erin's shore - with Ireland itself and to so kiss the blarney stone on a night such as tonight that in fact we see fact itself form a seamless bond with folklore and fiction - so that by night's end, courtesy of a Guinness or two, you'll all be believed that in fact you are led by a lady called Anna O'Bligh and that her opponent is Liam Patrick O'Springborg.
Such is the power of Guinness.
But you will hear no such blarney from me when I tell you that in fact I am a direct descendent of St Kevin, which of itself is problematic when you reflect upon the fact that St Kevin founded an ancient monastic order. Think about it. Problematic but not impossible.
But St Kevin is in fact much misunderstood because there is not an unreasonable school of thought in Irish history which says that indeed St Kevin and not St Patrick should be Ireland's patron saint.
Personally I have no such view, none whatsoever. Others could for example commend St Kevin's virtue, the sheer piety and poetry of his name. You mock. A poetry so deep and so broad and so rich that Dame Edna herself has written that it's impossible for anyone reputable, let alone as Prime Minister to be possibly called Kevin, which is why I have formed an International Society of Much Misunderstood Kevins. Kevin Costner is our patron.
And being an Irish dinner I imagine there are a few Kevins in the room. Any Kevins in the room? All misunderstood, each and every one of you.
But I digress. But should Eamon, upon his return to the Irish Republic, take this view as something of merit and in his discussions with the Irish church and with the Dail and chooses to change of course the Saint's name, the patron saint of Ireland, there will be no objection officially from the Antipodes.
But should that not be possible, and I fear it won't be, I can lay claim to ties less spiritual but more familial to Erin's Isle because beyond the blarney, my maternal grandmother Hannah Cashin was the daughter or Irish parents, both coming from a small parish of Ballingarry in Country Tipperary. Anyone here from Ballingarry? Much misunderstood.
Those parents, Owen Cashin and Johannah Maher, arrived here in Brisbane in 1887, they may well have known each other from their home town, having both been baptised in Ballingarry's Church of the Assumption. Ballingarry might have only been a small parish in County Tipperary but I am pleased to report it looms large in the history of the Irish rebellions of the 19th century.
It's a town where the Irish national tricolour of green, white and orange was first unfurled by the Young Irelander Rebellion of 1848 - in dramatic scenes where instead of the rebels taking siege in a local house, the police had to take siege in a local house against the rebels because the police didn't have the numbers. It was a clearly a much troubled town. The house still stands today as a national monument or so I'm advised. And the leader of that rebellion, William Smith O'Brien, was punished with one thing worse than death by hanging - transportation to Australia.
In fact, Eamon, you may well be aware that one in five Irish convicts transported to Australia came here guilty of political insurrection. And most of them later joined the Australian Labor Party.
Not only was my grandmother from a town of rebels, her father's family the Cashins were deeply entwined in an Irish factional fight which raged across Tipperrary through most of the 19th Century between the Shanavests and the Caravets.
Indeed, local newspapers in 1838 reported the murder of one William Cashin, my forebear - well not exactly, related - in a fight between the Shanavests and Caravets at Ballingarry Fair. A stone deal the mortal blow to his forehead.
So there you have it - republicans, seditionists, murderers, faction fighters, all in the family tree. I was therefore destined for a career in the Labor Party.
However, one crook note I should record for posterity  -  in preparing these notes, my senior adviser whose name is Annie Bridget Mary O'Rourke, from guess where, and it's not Germany, she let it be known to me that her forebear was transported from County Tipperary to Australia in 1838 on conviction of murder. She assures me that there is no connection between the demise of my forebear and the transportation of hers. You know what political staffers are like. It's all mere coincidences. Just an accident. Anyway, just for the record.
To balance this out, let me give you just a few moments on my father's side of the family heritage. I stand proud of my Mum's Irish heritage. Dad, is a different story. English, lumpen Protestants, the lot of them. Every one of them. Who makes my mother's Irish forebears the actual picture of respectability.
Block your ears, Justice de Jersey. On my father's side, no less than seven distinct convict lines. Crooks, forgers, highway robbers, the lot. There are separate records of different English ancestors of mine being convicted for stealing clocks, sugar, counterfeiting, robbery on the open road, and a theft of 200 pounds of glue. Sticky business, crime. That was a seriously terrible joke.
But I say this that when I was last in England and was a guest of Her Majesty at Windsor Castle, I didn't mention to Her Majesty that my very forebears had also been guests of Her Majesty. A different Her Majesty, and a different type of being guest.
But there you go. English, Irish forebears but all making Australia ultimately their home. The Irish imprint on the Australian character is indelible.
As I said before, one in three convicts was Irish and of those, one in five was sent here for their role in the very Irish Rebellion, and one in 10 Australians today claim Irish ancestry. Some say Australia is the most Irish country outside of Ireland itself, in its spirit, if not in its numbers.
And few states can claim a stronger Irish influence than Queensland. Those strong links are reflected here in the Queensland Irish Association, the only ethnic association of Brisbane to maintain an unbroken line for more than a hundred years. Give yourselves a clap.
The roll call of Australian history is of course thick with Irish names, whether in politics, in church, in business or in the wider community.
As Thomas Keneally observed in The Great Shame, as they spread to other lands, the Irish learn to wield the political and social clout that they were denied on their own soil.
And the roll call here in Australia includes at least six of my predecessors at The Lodge  -  James Scullin, Joseph Lyons, John Curtin, Francis Forde, Benedict Chifley, Paul Keating, as well as four from Queensland, at least. Thomas Joseph Byrne, Thomas Joseph Ryan, Ned Hanlon and dare I say it, Vincent Patrick Gair. We're all entitled to at least one black sheep.
All these have shaped our past. They steel us for the present. And they shape our future. 
As we in Australia and those of our friends in Ireland now confront the great challenges which the world presents as today, we are all now called on to call forth those great Irish Australian virtues and quality.
Virtues and qualities of pride, of tenacity, of fortitude in the face of adversity, of struggle, of faith, and of an abiding good humour in the face of adversity. Great Australian qualities. Great Irish qualities.
Eamon, you are in Australia as our guest. You are truly a welcomed guest among us. We are honoured that in this place, in Brisbane, we hosted your grandfather, the great Eamon de Valera in 1948. A legend of Irish politics. I'm told that Eamon de Valera in the midst of the troubles of 1916, while in full flight to delivering a speech such as this - I assume more eloquent and more political, because in this speech, a long speech, as speeches in Ireland can be from time to time, and sometimes in Australia, in a long speech - in walked the constabulary and arrested Eamon de Valera and threw him in the slammer for a full year.
In Australia it is a remarkable thing to be physically arrested for the length of your speeches - but not an entirely unwelcome development.
Can I say Eamon because of your grandfather's rich lineage, because of he himself having embraced this hall a half a century or more ago, and because of the great friendship which exists between the Irish Republic and the Commonwealth of Australia, it is a great joy to have you with us this evening.
In these tough times which we now face around the world, Ireland and Australia stand together.
And it is in that spirit that I now ask you to charge your glasses and to stand and toast Australia our nation, a country greatly enriched by its Irish heritage and proud of it. Australia.
I thank you one and all.


The Australian Government is pleased to participate in Earth Hour 2009.
Earth Hour is a great home-grown Australian initiative.
It began just two years ago.
But it's already a worldwide movement  -  with more than a thousand cities participating in 2009.
Its message is simply this.
Climate change is a challenge for all of us.
And we all need to put our shoulder to the wheel, to tackle this immense challenge.
That message is absolutely vital this year, as the nations of the world work together ahead of the Copenhagen Summit laster this year. 
It's crucial that we reach a deal on cutting greenhouse gas emissions.
This is not only an environmental challenge  -  it's also a massive economic challenge, a political challenge and one of the greatest moral challenges of our age.
Every country must play its part  -  developed countries must take the lead, but developing countries must be a part of the solution.
Since the beginning of the Industrial Revolution, we have all been on a carbon-heavy path of economic development.
That must change. 
We must transition to the low-carbon path. 
We must be able to grow our economies, while reducing carbon pollution.
That will require international cooperation on a level we've never seen before  -  to reduce emissions, to share technologies, and to support those nations who can't make this transition by themselves.
Australia is making its contribution internationally, and at home.
We've committed to reduce our emissions by between 5 and 15 per cent by 2020 compared to 2000 levels.
That's a reduction of between 34 and 41 per cent per head of population.
And by 2050, emissions will be down by 60 per cent.
In recent days the Government has released the draft legislation for a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, to achieve these targets. That scheme will for the first time put a cost on carbon pollution and create the incentives to reduce emissions, starting from next year.
We've also committed to generating 20 per cent of our electricity supply from renewable sources by 2020. That means our entire household electricity needs will come from renewable sources.
Early this year the Government announced a $42 billion Nation Building and Jobs Plan to help support jobs and growth in the face of the worst global economic recession since the 1930s.
A core part of this Plan is the largest investment in energy efficiency in the nation's history  -  which will pay for insulation or solar hot water for 2.2 million Australian homes.
The Australian Government is taking action globally, and at home.
And all Australians can show their commitment to action on climate change as well  -  by participating in Earth Hour 2009.
Thank you. 
You can view the video of the Prime Minister's Earth Hour message in the media hub. 


Secretary of Agriculture Tom Vilsack, Secretary of the Interior Ken Salazar, Brigadier General Blake Crowe, from the Department of Defence. Fire fighters of America, friends of Australia, friends of the United States. 
We are here today in both sorrow and in friendship. With sorrow we remember the impact of the terrible fires in the Australian State of Victoria. More than 200 people lost their lives. Nearly half a million hectares  -  close to one million acres  -  of land laid to waste. More than 2000 homes destroyed, leaving more than 7000 Australians homeless.
We have experienced bushfires in Australia before, just as you have here in the United States. But Black Saturday in Victoria was something different, something more terrible, for us an unprecedented tragedy.
But we are also here in today to honour friendship. At our lowest point, when the fires were raging, our friends were there and we in Australia have no closer friend than the United States of America.
President Barack Obama was among the first leaders to call me, expressing sympathy and offering practical assistance. And this contact from the President  -  as with contact from other leaders from around the world  -  was a real boost to the morale of the Australian people and those in the fire affected areas in Victoria.
When I was visiting the burned out areas and talking to those who had fought the fires, and those who had lost family, friends or property, the fact that people from right across the world were there expressing their solidarity and offering their comfort, their support, their money and their men, that meant a lot, it meant a real lot.
So, on behalf of the people of Australia, thank you America. Thank you Agriculture Secretary Vilsack and Interior Secretary Salazar. We were very grateful for your joint efforts to deploy a team of 73 wild land fire-fighters from the US National Wildfire Coordination Group to Victoria. Most of them have now returned but a 13-person Burned Area Emergency Response (BAER) team is still in Australia.
Thank you also to the US Department of Defence for carrying to Australia on one of its aircraft new stocks of fire retardant, ensuring that Victoria remained fire ready. Brigadier General Crowe and Ms Jessica Powers  -  thank you for your support.
I also want to acknowledge the support of our friends in the United States State Department who have been just wonderful friends and though you Dan Clune, Charge d'Affaires at the Embassy in Canberra  -  you and your team in Australia and the State Department team here in Washington, thank you for making all that happen and happen so quickly.
And of course there are the people who were doing the real work, helping us out on the ground. Eric Bush, Tony Johnson and Bodie Shaw from the National Interagency Fire Centre in Boise, Idaho  -  as representatives of the 73 Americans that came to our assistance in Australia  -  I say a very deep personal thank you mate.
And can I also say thank you Brodie for working with the US Wildland Fire Fighter Foundation to raise money to help Australian fire fighters who lost their homes in the Victorian fires, and to benefit the family of fallen fire fighter Mr David Balfour.
I would also like to acknowledge the presence of Alan Goodwin, Assistant Chief Fire Officer from the Victorian Department of Sustainability &amp; Environment. Alan helped coordinate cooperation between Victoria and the US authorities.
The truth is friends, we never know when fires are going to strike and the sorrow they bring along with the devastation. These fires in Australia challenged our souls, they challenged our humanity, they challenged our compassion, they challenged our courage. But all that was made more possible because we had so much by way of friendship and support and courage and determination from our friends in America.
I spent a lot of time in these fire affected communities. These are tough people, they are good people. But they themselves, and I know I speak on behalf of them, feel so much by way of gratitude to you our friends in America for what you did.
I was speaking before with the Secretaries of Agriculture and the Interior about the challenges you face here through fire. Your fire season, I'm advised, is going to get underway soon. I was also advised that in any given fire season you can be fighting up to 10,000 fires.
Can I just say to each of your fire fighters my personal appreciation and admiration for your sheer courage and professionalism. To put yourself in harm's way in defence of others with something so awesome and so terrible as a wild fire or what we call a bush fire requires genuine courage and I salute you.
Ladies and gentlemen, on behalf of the people of Australia and the people of the State of Victoria in particular, I thank you our friends in the United States of America.
[Ends] 


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
Thank you, Stephen, and to Australian Business for hosting us here today.
Thank you also to Michael Gutman, Managing Director of Westfield for the UK and Europe.
Lord Carter, Minister for Communications, Technology and Broadband.
The Right Honourable Helen Liddell, British High Commissioner for Australia.
Mr John Dauth, Australian High Commissioner.
Members of the diplomatic corps.
Distinguished guests.
Ladies and gentleman.
This week in London, leaders of the 20 largest economies of the world will met to forge a Global Strategy for Economic Recovery. There has been a lot of public discussion about the expectations for the meeting's outcome, but let me begin with a simple historical point.
During the Great Depression, it took nations some 15 years - from the crash in 1929 to Bretton Woods in 1944 - to agree on a global response. The delay of 15 years, deepening the slump in international trade and the soar in unemployment, had devastating impacts for economies, societies and world peace.
During those 15years, an opportunity for global policy coordination presented itself to world leaders - again in London. As I noted in a speech last week in Washington, 66 nations gathered at the World Monetary and Economic Conference in London in 1933 with, as HG Wells described, "a stout determination to be brilliant", but the fanfare to which the Conference opened dissipated as the three great Atlantic powers failed to reach agreement on policies to stabilise their currencies and would not commit to working against protectionism.
Instead, each nation advanced its own interests and pursued its own agenda of protectionism.
It was to take another 11 years and the tragedy of a World War for nations to gather and agree at Bretton Woods on the post-War global economic architecture.
In contrast, today, global leadership has come together rapidly, meeting in the first year of the crisis in Washington in November and again in London in April. The sense of urgency and the spirit of cooperation are a reflection not only of the depths of the crisis that we face but also of the political will that is galvanising concerted government action.
Australia, too, has taken early and decisive action to implement a strategy to see Australia through the current economic crisis.
This action has included an economic stimulus strategy in three parts:
     * Action to stabilise domestic financial markets,
     * Short-term economic stimulus to support growth and jobs, and
     * Long-term economic stimulus aimed at building the infrastructure that Australia needs for the 21st century, including the largest school modernisation program in Australia's history.
Our discretionary fiscal stimulus action amounts to around 4.5 per cent of GDP over the forward estimates. These various measures have contributed and will continue to contribute to Australia's economic growth and the stability of Australia's financial institutions.
While through-the-year to the December quarter all G7 economies had recorded negative growth, Australia's through-the-year growth to the December quarter was positive (0.3 per cent). Australia's economic growth remains among the top seven of the advanced economies. Our export volumes in the December quarter were higher than those of all G7 economies, and the third highest of the 30 OECD members.
In 2009-10, Australia's net public debt is projected to be 1.4 per cent of GDP - around 30 times less than the projected OECD average in 2010 of 48 per cent. Australia has the lowest Budget deficit when compared with the deficits of the G7 economies and one of the lowest in the OECD. Australian banks make up 4 of the world's 11 major banks that still retain an AA credit rating.
The Australian Government remains prepared to take whatever additional action is necessary to continue to support Australian economic growth and jobs and to continue to maintain stability in Australia's financial markets. Nonetheless, whatever national action Australia takes cannot be fully effective in the absence of coordinated international action, given the dimensions of the global economic recession that we will now confront.
The current crisis has shown that existing international bodies are in need of renovation if they are to meet the challenges of the 21st Century. In recent decades, international structures have not kept up with the growth in the pace and complexity of the global economy.
Between 1987 and 2007, real global GDP more than doubled. The value of world stock market capitalisations has increased more than three-fold, in nominal terms, from US$17.1 trillion in December 1995 to US$62.7 trillion in June 2008. Foreign exchange markets show a near tripling, in nominal terms, in daily turnover from US$1.2 trillion in March 2001 to US$3.2 trillion in March 2007. And most spectacularly, the notional contract amount of outstanding debt derivatives increased from US$72.1 trillion in June 1998 to US$683.7 trillion in June 2008, a 9-fold nominal increase in a period of just 10 years.
But during this same period, the international institutions that were designed to ensure stable functioning of the global financial and economic system went through no fundamental reform. In this period, the global centre of economic gravity began to shift as the emerging market economies played a greater role in driving global growth. We therefore face the global economic crisis of 2009 with international institutions designed in the wake of the Second World War and when the world was a vastly different place.
What has emerged is a gap between the capacity of existing global institutions and the sheer quantum and complexity of the economic problems we face. We need to update our institutions so that they assist governments in responding to global crises.
We do not need to start from scratch. Global architecture is struggling but it is not moribund. We still need institutions like the UN, the WTO, the IMF and the World Bank to help prevent conflict, promote trade liberalisation and financial stability and reduce poverty, but we must recognise that we need a mechanism to focus the international political will needed to develop responses to new challenges.
What we need is a driving centre. We need a grouping reflective of the distribution of power in the 21st Century and capable of providing leadership on the great challenges of the future, the stability of the global financial and economic system and the new threats to global peace and security, including climate change.
The G20 is the best on offer. It is not perfect. Realising its potential will take time, involving an evolutionary process, but the G20 has much in its favour. It brings together the established and the emerging powers. It straddles all continents and all major regions: five from Europe, five from Asia, five from the Americas, and five from other regions including Africa. It contains the major emerging powers of China, India, Brazil and Mexico. It includes the largest Muslim nation in the world, Indonesia. Its combined membership makes up 90 per cent of global GNP, 85 per cent of global trade and two-thirds of the global population. It is small enough to take decisions and large enough to be representative. It bridges the strategic and economic weight of the present and the future.
The individual interests of the G20 countries are not always aligned. It embraces different political and economic systems, but this diversity, coupled with its strategic and economic reach, makes it suited to help drive an agenda of global economic action for the future.
The G20 already has a strong existing base of cooperation to build on. The G20 was formed in 1999 after the Asian Financial Crisis - its finance ministers have been meeting together for a decade.
If we want the G20 to take on a broader role in developing global solutions to a range of problems, we need to elevate its level. Ahead of Thursday's meeting, it is important that we focus on the immediate agenda of tackling the global economic crisis - I will focus my remarks today on that challenge - but, in doing so, we must also have an eye to the future. We need to think about what sort of institutions we need to help craft global solutions to the sorts of global problems that national governments cannot solve.
The G20 is a strong starting point for that longer-term task.
The London Summit this week is only the second ever G20 leaders' meeting. Already, the leader level forum has enhanced the political drive behind the institution and helped to deliver concrete action to address this global recession.
The G20 Washington Declaration, agreed in November last year, outlined an ambitious program to help restore growth and begin much-needed reform of the world's financial system. In Washington, leaders recognised the need to: "use fiscal measures to stimulate domestic demand to rapid effect, as appropriate."
Since then, leaders have acted on that commitment with unprecedented and coordinated discretionary fiscal stimulus. For the G20 as a whole, the size of discretionary fiscal stimulus is around $2.5 trillion, and is estimated by the IMF to save up to 20 million jobs. This is on top of the impact of the automatic stabilisers, which are very large in some G20 countries. And the IMF estimates that the impact of national fiscal action has been increased by a bonus of 50 per cent because it was implemented jointly and virtually at the same time across open economies.
Two weeks ago at the G20 Finance Ministers meeting, the Communiqué recommitted G20 nations to further macroeconomic action as necessary. The Communiqué noted: "Fiscal action is providing vital support for growth and jobs ... we are committed to deliver the scale of sustained effort necessary to restore growth...we will ensure the restoration of growth and long-run fiscal sustainability".
For all the talk of disunity and the 'transatlantic fiscal fight' that dominates some parts of the press - these facts and these policy declarations that we have already witnessed unprecedented action and unprecedented coordination on fiscal policy. In addition to fiscal policy, G20 leaders have also taken extraordinary action to support lending in our financial systems, already having:
     * eased monetary policy and made the largest global reductions in interest rates around the world in modern times,
     * protected savings and deposits, and
     * provided liquidity support, including the use of government guarantees
     * injected capital into financial institutions, and
     * strengthened banks' balance sheets, including through dealing with impaired assets.
This was highlighted in the agreement reached by G20 Finance Ministers on 14 March for a framework for restoring lending which outlined principles for dealing with impaired assets. The principles, which underpin a globally coordinated approach, include the eligibility of assets and institutions, risk transfer and burden sharing, transparency and disclosure, valuation and monitoring. We also committed in Washington to resist protectionism, realising that we must avoid beggar-thy-neighbour policies and sustain the benefits over open markets and globalisation.
While this has not been 100 per cent successful - and some transgressions have occurred - so far these have tended to be venial rather than mortal sins. No doubt part of the reason protectionism has been limited is the pressure exerted by the G20 through their monitoring and public report-back mechanisms to leaders' meetings.
There has also been substantial progress on strengthening the financial system regulatory framework and advancing the 47 action items agreed last November. This was highlighted by the G20 Finance Ministers on 14 March where they identified measures including:
     * the expansion of the Financial Stability Forum to include all G20 countries,
     * improved regulatory oversight over Credit Rating Agencies, and
     * principles for compensation which avoid excessive risk-taking.
To help emerging markets and developing countries cope with the impact of the crisis, the G20 has been instrumental in supporting a major increase in the resources of the IMF and accelerating IMF reform.
The achievements to date represent important early steps to deal with this global crisis. 
But there is much more to do as the crisis develops and unfolds. The London G20 Summit this week must make progress towards a Global Strategy for Economic Recovery.
The agenda is broad, but the fact is that the Summit will be judged on one overarching outcome - whether leaders can agree on a forward work plan that helps to restore confidence to a global economy sorely lacking in confidence. In order to provide people with a rational basis for confidence, the London Summit must deliver more than words.
We must reach a substantive agreement on five key areas: further macro-economic action, addressing toxic assets to restore lending, reform of the international financial institutions, reform of the global regulatory framework and holding the line against protectionism.
On supporting growth, leaders must reaffirm Finance Ministers' commitment to take "whatever action is necessary until growth is restored", and we must operationalise this commitment by directing the IMF to report and advise us on the need for further stimulus.
Second, we must act to address the root cause of the crisis - the 'toxic assets' on the balance sheets of systemically significant banks. Secretary Geither's public-private investment plan announced last week is an important initial step in support of confidence in the banking system, but the problem of banking systems in developing countries facing increasing stress will continue to have dangerous flow-on consequences for large Western banks with exposure to emerging markets. We must therefore endorse the Finance Ministers' framework for impaired asset management, including mechanisms for cooperation through the Financial Stability Forum and the IMF.
Thirdly, we must agree to increased resourcing and reform of international financial institutions, with particular attention to the IMF. We should aim to double and, if required, to triple, the pre-crisis level of the IMF's resources. We should also support reform of the IMF ownership structure to better reflect current global economic weightings.
Fourthly, we must work towards addressing the weaknesses in the global regulatory framework - not least because of the necessity of demonstrating to an under-confident public that we are rectifying the regulatory failures of governments that allowed the crisis to occur. We must implement the Washington Action Plan against firm timelines. We must subject all global financial institutions, markets and products to a level of regulation appropriate to their systemic importance. Macro-prudential oversight and FSF coordination of the development of tools to address systemic vulnerabilities could better prevent the build-up of systemic risks.
Finally, we must hold the line against acts of protectionism, be it physical goods or the new forms of financial protectionism that now confront us - the Smoot-Hawley Tariff of the 21st Century.
If substantive agreement to tackle the key causes of the crisis and to mitigate the consequences of the crisis is achieved, the green shoots of confidence can credibly grow.
These substantive outcomes will be a significant achievement, but the actions we not of themselves immediately fix the crisis. That will take some time. The IMF now forecasts growth of between minus 0.5 and minus 1 per cent in 2009. The OECD's Interim Economic Outlook released today says the world economy is in the midst of the deepest and most synchronised recession in our lifetimes. The OECD expects output in its 30 member economies to contract by 4.3 per cent in 2009. These numbers are a wake up call for the G20 Leaders meeting in London.
Looking ahead, the IMF predicts that in 2010, global growth will be between 1.5 and 2.5 per cent, down from 3 per cent predicted few months ago, but the fact is that the risks are on the downside, and the economy could turn out to be substantially worse than these forecasts.
The first major risk to global recovery over the next year comes from the potential economic collapse in emerging markets and developing countries. Most focus in this respect is on Central and Eastern Europe, which will need to roll over US$413 billion of external debt in 2009. According to IMF estimates, Eastern Europe will have a financing gap in 2009 of US$123 billion and of US$63 billion in 2010. The capital needs of Western European banks would be exacerbated by losses in Eastern Europe, with total exposure to the region at about US$1.6 trillion. There are also risks to developing countries in other regions.
The second major risk to global recovery is the process of deleveraging that may depress growth even as the economy recovers. Many advanced countries have experienced decades of low saving and over-consumption. Households and firms have already begun to change their saving behaviour, saving more to restore some of their lost wealth.
In the United States, personal savings rates are estimated to have recently increased to up above 4 per cent, the highest level for fifteen years and up from less than 1 per cent for much of 2005 to 2008. This deleveraging will affect growth in advanced economies. Indeed, the IMF is concerned that this deleveraging will lead to lower consumption, investment and skills acquisition, reducing long-term growth rates and increasing unemployment in the long term by up to 1 per cent.
The risk of a deepening economic crisis in the short term, and depressed long term growth, presents broader challenges. Last November, at the Washington Summit, I observed the likelihood that the global economic crisis would, in some nations, become a political and social crisis. History speaks to the likelihood of this reality.
The President of the African Development Bank, Donald Kaberuka, recently vocalised the concern, observing - "I fear for social stability, I fear for political stability, and it is happening already".
In his 'Annual Threat Assessment of the Intelligence Community" to the Senate in February, which typically focuses on terrorism and nuclear proliferation, the new US Director of National Intelligence, Dennis Blair, claimed that "the primary near-term security concern of the United States is the global economic crisis and its geopolitical implications". Looking forward at potential impacts, the US Director of Intelligence also noted that "statistical modelling shows that economic crises increase the risk of regime-threatening instability if they persist over a one to two year period".
Projections and modelling aside, devastating social impacts are already emerging. 
According to the World Bank, an extra 53 million people will be trapped in poverty this year alone as a result of the crisis, and the crisis will hurt the world's most vulnerable, with the World Bank estimating that infant mortality will increase by between 200,000 and 400,000 children per year from 2009 if the current crisis persists.
Dealing with these risks and the evolving nature of the crisis will require the G20 to continue to adapt its work program. A future program should have the following three elements.
First, to deal with the risks to emerging markets, we must ensure close monitoring and regular quarterly feedback from the IMF and World Bank on the risks to emerging markets, as well as their systemic impact on the global economy.
Second, we need follow-up on the implementation of our commitments concerning stimulus, toxic assets, IMF resourcing and reform, regulatory reform and holding the line against an outbreak of protectionism.
Third, we need to commission and develop - through the IMF, World Bank, Financial Stability Forum and other relevant international bodies - an integrated, sustainable medium-term growth agenda. This medium term agenda should include the following elements:
     * how do we make the most of our education and training systems?
     * how do we use our capital and labour most effectively?
     * how do we increase energy efficiency and expand the role of renewable energy?
     * how do we ensure that our regulatory systems are consistent across borders?
All these are important medium term challenges.
In closing, there are two challenges ahead of us this week.
First, we have to tackle the short term economic challenges that confront us today and provide consumers and markets with a rational basis for confidence. This means real outcomes at the London Summit, but the other task ahead of us this week is to look to a further horizon. 
We must take steps towards laying the foundations of the global institutions and decision-making architecture that will serve the people, underpin the markets and help us tackle the next great challenges we will face. Based on these short- and long-term reforms, we must also build a credible public narrative surrounding a global strategy for economic recovery.
The content of that strategy (as outline in my remarks today) is critical. How global political leaders describe that strategy in their communications with their peoples is equally critical. Re-building confidence, both for businesses and consumers, must embrace both; that is, a strategy that will work, and a narrative which explains the implementation of that strategy to the people.
That is why when leaders emerge from London this week, it is critical that, collectively, we lead the international debate on the return of the global economy to growth levels that secure our collective long-term economic future.


Acknowledgements 
     * Tony Nicholson, Executive Director of the Brotherhood of St Laurence
     * Cr Daniel Mulino, Deputy Mayor, City of Casey Council
     * Cr Bill Pearson, Mayor, Cardinia Shire Council
     * Deputy Prime Minister
     * Minister for Employment
     * Anthony Byrne
     * State Members and Local Councillors 
Introduction
Two days ago, I was at the G20 Summit in London.
Today, I am with you in this great local community in the City of Casey in Melbourne.
Both these meetings are about one core challenge: in the midst of a severe global recession, how do we rebuild our economy, and how do we rebuild jobs?
The truth is we are experiencing the worst global recession in three-quarters of a century.
Every country.
Every economy.
Every industry.
Virtually every community.
And for the first time in three-quarters of a century, all at the same time.
But in the midst of all the complex economic jargon, all the political debates, and all the media commentary, where the rubber hits the road is in one basic thing: jobs.
Jobs in local communities like this one in the City of Casey.
And in local communities like it all over the world.
Because the impact of this global recession is very local.
Which means we must act locally as well.
It affects community life.
It affects family life.
And it affects individuals in a deep and often scarring way.
Unemployment can undermine human dignity, and self-respect.
Our responsibility as Australians (government and community together) is not to stand idly by and allow the unemployed to be simply thrown to the wolves as the victims of some failure of a fundamentalist free market ideology.
Our responsibility is to intervene.
Because those who lose their jobs are not to blame.
Our responsibility is to intervene.
Not to deny the problem.
But to embrace it in all of its depth, its complexity and its gathering speed and force.
And then to act by deploying the full resources of government and the community to reduce its force while recognising we cannot eliminate its impact.
And that is what I am here to talk to you about today.
And also to hear from you about what more we can do.
Because the truth is we are all in this together:
     * all nations around the world;
     * all levels of government within our nation Australia (federal, state and local);
     * businesses large and small;
     * business and unions together against a common foe, unemployment;
     * the community itself, in all its local dynamism, local creativity and local sense of the possible.
Because as I have learned over the last 16 months as Prime Minister, all wisdom does not lie in Canberra.
But as Prime Minister I am also here to issue a national call to arms: and that is for the nation to bind together as one in a national campaign against unemployment.
Everyone has a part to play.
While government must take the lead, everyone has a part to play.
And our end point is clear: to do whatever it takes at the global, national and local level to support local jobs and to help those who lose their jobs to retrain and to find a new job.
Global Action
The causes of the economic crisis are global.
And global action is necessary to underpin the prospects of global economic recovery.
In a global economy, Australia, like other countries, is not an island.
Australian jobs are directly affected by our trade with the rest of the world; our investment in the rest of the world and them in us; and the continuation of global financial flows, the life-blood of business and employment everywhere.
The good news is that in London we agreed on a global strategy for global economic recovery.
When I sat down the other night with fellow leaders from 20 of the biggest economies in the world, I said to my colleagues around the table that what began as a global financial crisis had already become a crisis in the global economy and was now becoming a global crisis in unemployment.
None of my colleagues disagreed.
Not one of them.
Because they all know it to be true, from their own local experience.
And what they also know to be true is that rebuilding local jobs can only happen through concerted global action.
It is an unusual but an empowering thing, to sit down with the King of Saudi Arabia, the President of communist China, the President of capitalist America and Presidents from countries as diverse as South Africa, South Korea and Brazil, all speaking different languages, but all speaking the one language: what must we do to rebuild jobs?
That is why in the very beginning of the London Communiqué issued only a day or so ago, it states in black and white that ‘our global plan for recovery must have at its heart the needs and jobs of hard-working families...'
The good news is that despite those who never thought it possible, governments from all continents representing 85 per cent of the global economy agreed on a global strategy for global economic recovery.
A strategy on global economic stimulus, on restoring global banks to health, on acting ahead of the curve on future global financial markets, on reforming the regulations on banking to reduce the risk of future crises; and to hold the line on new protection which would destroy more jobs everywhere.
The sobering news is that this will take time to implement and to yield its full effect.
These combined actions do not represent a silver bullet.
And there's more work to be done.
But they do however represent the combined resolve of the world to act as one and to embrace a global economic strategy for global recovery never seen before in modern economic history.
And with one galvanising objective: how to restore growth and support jobs.
National Action
Global action must also be reinforced by concerted national action  -  right here, on the home front.
That's why the Australian Government is implementing an economic stimulus plan for the nation, to reduce the impact of the global recession on Australian jobs.
This plan has four main parts.
First, beginning last October, we have acted to stabilise Australian financial markets including providing a Government guarantee to every single Australian depositor in a bank, building society or credit union, to maintain confidence at home while we have seen confidence shattered abroad, with the result that our four major banks remain among the 11 strongest banks in the world.
Second, also starting last October, we took early and decisive action to stimulate the economy by providing payments to pensioners, carers, veterans and families doing it tough, thereby supporting the 1.5 million Australians whose jobs are in the retail and wholesale sector.
Third, also to stimulate the economy and support jobs we have invested directly in our housing sector with a trebling in the First Home Buyers assistance, the single biggest government investment in affordable housing in history, a new plan to install ceiling insulation in every owner-occupied dwelling in the country and all supported by a record 4 percentage point cut in interest rates.
Fourth, to further stimulate the economy we have begun a massive long-term investment in the nation-building infrastructure we will need for the 21st century, including the largest school modernisation and repair program the country has ever seen  -  to provide work for carpenters, plumbers and electricians across each of Australia's nearly 10,000 primary and secondary schools.
Finally, we have done this by drawing on the strong Budget surplus we delivered last year.
These are hard decisions for the Government to take, but we are living in very hard times.
Temporary deficits based on temporary borrowings, to boost the economy in the downturn, is the responsible course of action.
Our resolve throughout will be to take action to return the Budget to surplus once global economic growth recovers and then use those surplus funds to repay our temporary borrowings.
Notwithstanding the fact that our borrowings as a percentage of the economy are one tenth the average borrowings of the world's developed economies.
As with global economic action, our national economic stimulus plan does not represent a silver bullet.
As I have said before, I cannot stop this global recession from crashing across Australia's shores.
But I can act to cushion the impact of the storm once it has hit.
The most recent growth and employment data from the OECD makes it virtually inevitable that Australia will go through a period of negative economic growth ahead.
28 of the 30 most developed economies in the world are already in recession or have experienced at least one quarter of negative economic growth.
Seven of Australia's ten largest trading partners are already in recession
Because of the deepening global recession, the economy is likely to get worse before it gets better.
Our budget will come under greater pressure.
But the alternative is to do nothing.
And rather than reduce the impact of the global economic storm as we have done, to instead expose all Australian workers to its full force.
That is not our approach.
Nor will it be our approach.
Our strategy is right for the times.
A strategy to see Australia through the storm.
Local Action
The impact of this global recession is not merely a matter of global and national economic statistics.
Statistics are lifeless.
The impact of this global recession is felt here on the ground, in real families in real local communities like this one in the City of Casey.
It is communities like this where unemployment hits early and hard.
I have no intention whatsoever of gilding the lily.
In February, unemployment rose by 47,000 people.
In Dandenong, a short drive from here, the numbers applying for unemployment benefits in January rose to nearly 3000  -  a 13 per cent rise over the previous month.
In Glen Waverley and Springvale it was more than 13 per cent.
In Cranbourne, right here in this community, it was 15.5 per cent.
Fifty jobs gone from Nissan in South Dandenong, 115 from Kenworth in Bayswater, more than 150 from Bosch in Clayton. 
And 255 gone from Holeproof  -  a Pacific Brands company  -  just down the road in Nunawading.
Those of you who live in this community know the stories only too well.
These local impacts demand a national response.
And they demand a local response.
That is why I have come to the City of Casey today, to announce a new Jobs and Training Compact for Australia.
Our Jobs and Training Compact will have three parts:
     * A Compact with Young Australians;
     * A Compact with Australians who have been retrenched;
     * A Compact with Local Communities  -  communities like Cranbourne - where unemployment has hit hard.
     * First, our Compact with Young Australians.
This Government has resolved not to repeat the mistakes of previous governments  -  which is to reduce their commitment to training in a downturn in order to save money.
We cannot afford today's school leavers becoming tomorrow's long-term unemployed.
Nor do we intend to shy away from the great ambitions we have set for the nation in the implementation of our Education Revolution.
In fact now is the time to drive these reforms even harder, because they will strengthen our economy by improving the skills of our workforce  -  skills which can be fully deployed as we emerge from the global recession.
ABS data shows for example that 20 per cent of 19 year olds  -  about 60,000 young people  -  do not have Year 12 or equivalent qualifications.
About 16.5 per cent of 20 to 24 year olds  -  238,000 Australians  -  do not have Year 12 or equivalent qualifications.
The time has come to act on this problem  -  a problem rendered even more urgent by the unfolding economic downturn and increasing unemployment.
The government has already announced new measures to support apprenticeships:
     * 3,650 additional pre-apprenticeship places;
     * $145 million to support thousands of ‘out-of-trade' apprentices who have been laid off by their employers; and
     * a preference provision for businesses engaged in our $30 billion Nation-Building and Jobs Plan, who demonstrate a commitment to retain and employ new apprentices and trainees.
Second, unemployed young people are also eligible for one of the 711,000 training places released under the $2.1 billion Productivity Places Program  -  designed to help all workers upgrade their skills for the future.
But more needs to be done  -  much more.
That's why at this month's meeting of State and Territory Governments, the Australian Government will be proposing that every young Australian under the age of 25 is given a school, apprenticeship, training or higher education place to ensure that our young people are properly skilled for when the economy recovers.
This Compact with Young Australians will mean that young Australians under the age of 25 will have an entitlement to a training place or any registered course in which the young person can meet admission requirements, and which will result in improving that young person's current qualifications.
Second, we will also ask State and Territory Governments to lift the mandatory age at which young people must be in school or engaged in training or employment  -  and we will ask them to bring forward the already agreed COAG goal of 90 per cent Year 12 or equivalent attainment from 2020 to 2015. That will mean starting now.
Third, the Australian Government intends to alter the participation requirements for income support for young people and their families by making education and training the single most important precondition for receiving Youth Allowance.
So at a time when employment prospects are poor, the Australian Government wishes to send a clear message to Australian young people.
If you haven't completed Year 10, you should be in school.
If you are under 17, you should be in full-time school, training, higher education or full time work.
If you don't have a Year 12 or equivalent qualification you should be in school or training to attain an equivalent qualification.
I will not stand idly by and watch a generation of young people have their potential, their talents and their enthusiasm wasted in an economic downturn.
All these measures are aimed at helping our young people to use the difficult time that lies ahead in an employment market that is not of their making, to lift their skills for the future.
Good for young people.
Good for the Education Revolution.
Good for productivity.
And good for the Australian economy.
Compact with Retrenched Workers
The second part of our new Jobs and Training Compact is our Compact with Retrenched Workers.
Already the Government has announced measures to make it easier for retrenched workers to access Newstart Allowance by making the eligibility criteria twice as easy to meet as it was before.
We have also invested a further $300 million to help retrenched workers to get immediate access to appropriate employment assistance to help find new training or a new job. This brings our investment in reformed and upgraded employment services for jobseekers to more than $4 billion.
We have also invested more than $2 billion to fund more than 711,000 training places including 319,000 places identified for jobseekers, 10,000 places for workers in industries facing long term decline, and 10,000 places for workers who have been newly retrenched, concentrating on Certificate 3 and 4-level qualifications.
In less than a year since we announced this overall program, some 92,000 jobseekers have already enrolled in training courses.
However the immediate problems facing many families whose breadwinners have lost their jobs is the anxiety and fear which arises from: how do I pay my mortgage, how do I pay off my car?
These are real bottom line concerns around kitchen tables right across Australia.
That's why some time ago, I asked the Treasurer to negotiate an agreement with Australia's big four banks on a comprehensive package of assistance to working families who lose their jobs.
So today, I am pleased to announce the outcome of the Treasurer's work with the banks, which provides for the better handling of borrowers in hardship through loss of employment.
In relation to mortgages, the banks will now work with borrowers suffering from employment hardship to negotiate postponing for up to 12 months the dates from which payments are due under their mortgage contract, with interest to be capitalised into the loan.
The banks are also prepared to consider extending the period of the mortgage contract and reducing the amount of each payment due under the contract.
Banks also indicated that on other loans (including car loans) they would be prepared to consider providing interest-only repayment options where appropriate.
The banks have also indicated their preparedness to consider fee waivers for borrowers in hardship cases.
Of course, these options won't be appropriate in every case, and banks will make assessments based on the borrowers' ability to meet new contractual obligations in the long term.
But the Government's purpose in its negotiations with the banks has been clear  -  to ask the banks to provide maximum flexibility for borrowers suffering temporary hardship through enforced unemployment for the 12 month period ahead.
I'd like to publicly thank the banks for the goodwill they have demonstrated so far in this area, including the decisions announced by the Commonwealth Bank a few weeks ago.
Whether you're a banker or a battler, it's in every Australians' interest that we pull together; because that's the only way we will see the nation through these tough global conditions.
More remains to be done for retrenched workers and the government stands ready to build on our new Compact with Retrenched Workers as necessary in the future.
Compact with Local Communities
The third part of our new Jobs and Training Compact is our Compact with Local Communities which have been hardest hit by the global crisis.
Already the Government is acting at a local level through, for example, the local implementation of the $30 billion Nation Building and Jobs Plan passed by the Parliament last month.
Our ambition is to turn every one of our more than 7,500 primary schools in the country into a construction site; to do the same for 500 of our secondary schools; and for billions of dollars of repairs, maintenance and minor works across every school campus in the country  -  all designed to generate local jobs and to improve local school and community infrastructure.
For example, schools in the City of Casey (one of only 565 local government areas in the country) like Holy Family in Doveton, Cranbourne Primary School in Cranbourne and Casey Grammar in Cranbourne East will be eligible to receive Australian Government grants of up to $3 million each over the coming months.
Second, the Government is also implementing an $800 million program, in partnership with local government across the nation through our Local Community Infrastructure Program.
We are doing this because we believe as a general rule that local governments are good at getting local community infrastructure projects going quickly.
And because these projects can be done quickly, local jobs can flow quickly.
Again let me give you a local example where this area has already received over $2 million in investment in the first instalment of the program.
These projects include:
     * Upgrading of the Casey Fields Sportsground;
     * Refurbishment of 16 tennis courts;
     * Upgrade of 13 playgrounds and a netball pavilion;
     * The construction of a new cafe and kitchen at the Aquatic Centre; and
     * The landscaping of Berwick Springs.
But more needs to be done.
That's why today I am announcing that we will invest $20.8 million to employ Local Employment Coordinators in regions most affected by job losses.
We will initially appoint them to seven regions:
     * Here in Casey, covering communities in south-eastern Melbourne
     * In Canterbury and Bankstown covering south-western Sydney
     * In the Illawarra, south of Sydney
     * In the Ipswich - Logan corridor in south-east Queensland
     * In northern and western suburbs of Adelaide
     * In south-west Perth
     * In northern Tasmania
These Coordinators will be appointed by next month.
More will be added over time.
The mission statement of these Local Employment Coordinators is to work directly with local government, with local business, with local community organisations helping to make sure that new national training programs are being properly delivered locally and that local infrastructure programs are being implemented in the best way possible to maximise local employment, and that new projects are brought forward.
They will help to match demand for labour created by our nation building efforts with supply of labour at the local level.
In doing so, they will also work closely with local networks of job services providers.
Their job will be to add value and to act as a regional coordination point for those already engaged, and who will be engaged, in the core task of generating new jobs and training opportunities from the ground up  -  not just from the top down.
In other words, these Local Employment Coordinators are intended to become local jobs champions, and are intended to be experienced, senior people, capable of making things happen - in the closest possible collaboration with the local community.
Today I can also announce I have asked industry legend and great Australian Lindsay Fox to work directly with our Local Employment Coordinators across the country.
I want Lindsay to be able to advise employers in disadvantaged communities on practical ways they can keep on their workers and even take on new apprentices and employees.
Lindsay did great work in the early 1990s when he teamed up with union leader Bill Kelty and travelled the country to help create up to 60,000 jobs at a time when jobs were hard to find.
And Lindsay has asked Bill to help him in this task once again.
But beyond Lindsay and Bill, I am also today making a broader call to the nation: that is, in these high unemployment areas, for all men and women of goodwill to rally around our Local Employment Coordinators and the consultation structures they create with local government and the wider local community to boost local jobs, local training and other forms of support for local people who lose their jobs.
And the reason is: we are all in this together.
Government alone cannot solve this problem.
But with creative, entrepreneurial ingenuity from the community level up, we can do a power of good to reduce the problem.
It will also give practical expression to the great Australian tradition of extending a helping hand - and giving everyone a fair go when times are tough.
It may be something as simple as checking out how your neighbours are going, or some of the parents from school, if you hear there have been job losses in the family.
Word of mouth, or the bush telegraph, is still often the best means of connecting people who need a helping hand with those who can provide it.
I am absolutely convinced that Australians will rise to the challenge, as times of crisis bring out the best in our national character  -  uniting the nation rather than dividing it as we have seen from time to time in other parts of the world.
Finally, this new compact with local communities also needs to have its own bigger resource base to draw upon for the future.
That's why I am also announcing today the establishment of a $650 million Local Jobs Fund.
This temporary fund will support other local projects that will create job and training opportunities for people in communities most affected by the downturn.
It will help local councils build new and improved community infrastructure, such as playgrounds, bike paths and in the restoration of heritage buildings.
It will also be designed for start-up capital for innovative social enterprises for the not-for-profit sector.
There are also many good organisations like St Vincent de Paul, the Salvation Army, the Exodus Foundation in Sydney and of course the Brotherhood of St Laurence here in Melbourne whose donor base is currently under pressure because of the downturn  -  precisely at the time charitable organisations are needed most.
We would like to see organisations in this situation to be able to make application for temporary support under this fund.
This Fund, together with other government programs will also provide an opportunity to transition Australia towards the new green jobs of the 21st century  -  part of a sustainable economy with burgeoning employment potential for the future.
The Fund includes the commitments made in February in Parliament with Senator Bob Brown of the Greens and Senator Steve Fielding to provide support for local green jobs, and to get communities working.
I would like to thank both Senators for their practical cooperation and their political commitment to supporting local community employment during the downturn.
Again I repeat my call to the nation at large  -  to local Chambers of Commerce, church, community, charitable organisations and the not-for-profit sector more generally, to come together locally  -  with one objective, which is to make a difference locally.
To make a difference with local jobs, local training, and to reduce local hardship.
It's the Australian thing to do.
Conclusion
These then are our plans for the future  -  for the dark and difficult times that lie before us.
Acting globally,
Acting nationally,
Acting locally, to help those who lose their jobs through no fault of their own.
And in all these things our guiding light is this:
     * to reduce the impact on Australian jobs in the global recession;
     * to build new jobs by building the new infrastructure we need for the 21st century and the new sustainable economy we need for the 21st century; and
     * to train and retrain our workforce during this downturn to equip them and the nation with the skills we will need for the recovery.
This is our strategy for the future.
People often talk about the need for confidence.
I agree.
I also agree we can be confident in our future.
Not because some of us might say so.
Words without action count for nothing.
But words based on action count for a lot.
And what I have outlined today is a comprehensive plan of action.
More will need to be done.
But our strategy is clear.
And based on this strategy we have a rational basis for hope, a rational basis for optimism, and a rational basis for confidence in the future.
Because of the deepening of the global economic recession, there will be more bad economic data ahead, as night follows day. 
For the economy.
For employment.
And therefore for the Budget.
But this government intends to stay the course.
This government intends to prosecute the strategy I have outlined, to steer Australia through the global economic storm.
And together, with communities like this community in Casey, we can build an even stronger Australia for the future.


I am delighted to join you this morning for this inaugural meeting of members of the Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute.
It's almost 18 months ago since Australians elected a new Government. The first act of that Government, after I was sworn into office, was to sign the instrument of ratification of the Kyoto Protocol.
We sent a clear message to Australia and to our friends around the world.
We made it clear that we would honour our commitment to end an era of denial about climate change and its impact on the world, our own nation, our own environment and on the economy.
And we made it clear that we would act on climate change, at home and abroad, because without one another, without acting with each other it's impossible to bring about real change. And we made it clear that Australia would begin to shift from being part of the global climate change problem to being part of the global climate change solution.
We have taken a number of steps forward in the past 18 months on each of the three pillars of the Government's response to climate change: reducing Australia's carbon pollution, helping to shape a global solution, and adapting to the impacts of climate change that we cannot avoid.
On the first pillar of this strategy, we have made extensive progress on our plans to reduce Australia's greenhouse emissions through a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, to place a price on carbon. And by boosting renewable energies in Australia and by boosting energy efficiency measures, including investing in home insulation that will help reduce the carbon footprint in some 2.7 million Australian households.
On the second pillar of our approach, the Government's climate change strategy, we have worked extensively with other nations to advance a global agreement on reducing carbon emissions ahead of the summit in Copenhagen this December. This was a major item in my discussions with United States President Obama in Washington earlier this month.
And on the third pillar of climate change adaptation, we have invested significantly in initiatives to help those parts of Australia most exposed to the impacts of climate change  -  including our farming communities.
The Government's climate change strategy is being implemented step by step, recognising the urgency of the environmental and the economic imperative for action. The economic imperative is becoming clearer and clearer, as Australia is among the first nations in the developed world to feel the economic impacts of climate change.
The Government believes that the economic cost of inaction on climate change is far greater than the cost of action and that sustained inaction imperils our economy and the global economy.
That's why after a decade of inaction on climate change, this Australian Government is committed to a systematic program of action both at home and abroad. And that's why today we take another important step forward in the Government's response to climate change  -  as we launch this Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute.
The GCCSI is a major initiative to drive global cooperation to deploy technologies that can play a very important part in our transition to the low carbon economy of the future. In just seven months, we have obtained the support for the GCCSI from 85 of the most significant governments, corporations and institutions around the world  -  supporting a project to deal with the reality of coal-fired electricity generation over the next decade and beyond.
This Institute recognises the cold hard reality that coal will be the major source of power generation for many years to come  -  with the 2008 IEA World Energy Outlook forecasting that the share of electricity generation sourced from coal will rise from 41 per cent now to 44 per cent by 2030. This is a reality we have to deal with.
Australia therefore has a national and shared global responsibility to establish the workability of this technology and to establish it at scale. If we succeed together, Australia and the world will benefit greatly in dealing with the challenge of climate change. If we fail through this and other shared enterprises around the world and establish that CCS cannot deliver the outcomes we need, then the challenge of global climate change action will be even greater than we currently contemplate. The stakes are very high in the gathering to which you have come here in Australia today.
That's why the time for coordinated, accelerated action on CCS has well and truly come. The world cannot afford to waste another year. That's why we must bring together governments and industry and relevant financial institutions together in this great economic and environmental enterprise. And that is the vision that underpins the Australian Government's support for this Global Institute. And we emphasise the world global. I say again to each and every one of you in this room, together we can act, if we act simply separately we will not achieve the outcome the world needs.
The Institute will play an important role in two of the three pillars of the Government's climate change strategy. At home, this initiative is an important complementary measure to the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme. It aims to help us to reduce our carbon pollution by advancing technology that will capture and store emissions. And abroad, by building momentum for the deployment of CCS technology, the Institute will help shape an international solution to climate change.
To those of you who represent governments from around the world or from corporations headquartered in countries other than Australia, can I simply say this: in recent weeks and months as I've travelled around the world and spoken to various of your heads of Government about this Institute, it engages a level of interest and enthusiasm beyond the diplomatic and beyond the polite because governments around the world and the largest corporations around the world understand instinctively how critical this work is.
And whether it's been at the APEC Summit in Lima, whether it was at the first G20 meeting in Washington last year or the recently concluded G20 meeting in London, and in other bilateral engagements I've had with heads of Government around the world, I would simply say to you that this is generally accepted as being an important initiative for us all.
Working closely with the International Energy Agency and the Carbon Sequestration Leadership Forum, our vision is to build an institute that will galvanise global efforts to demonstrate and deploy CCS technology.
Since the Institute's formation was announced on September 19 last year, it has received strong and widespread support from governments and key industry groups around the world and today we are announcing the initial 85 members of this Institute.
National members of this important initiative will include the European Commission, the United States of America, Japan, Germany, China, the United Kingdom, France, Italy, Canada, Mexico, the Republic of Korea, The Netherlands, Indonesia, Norway, South Africa, New Zealand, the Emirate of Abu Dhabi, Papua New Guinea and others. And I acknowledge also the active support of all of the State Governments of Australia.
On the industry side, we also have members from the coal, oil and gas, electricity, technology, finance and research sectors, who have also become members of this Institute. And on behalf of the Government of Australia can I say to each of you as corporate leaders, I thank you very much for being part of the solution.
The World Bank, the Asian Development Bank and the International Energy Agency are also major participants and I thank them for the credibility they bring to our table by virtue of their institutional engagement. And certainly in my discussions with the heads of a number of those institutions, most recently the President of the World Bank, I am confident that that institution together with others will be active supporters of this enterprise.
Two weeks ago I announced the appointment of the former head of the World Bank, Jim Wolfensohn, to chair the Institute's International Advisory Panel, which will provide strategic advice and direction to the Institute's global activities. Jim Wolfensohn brings vast experience and international influence and strategic vision to the Institute and we are delighted that he has agreed to accept this position.
And today I am pleased to confirm Mr Nick Otter as the interim CEO of the Institute. Nick has been doing a first class job in getting the Institute up and running since January, when he was seconded from his position as Director of Technology and External Affairs at Alstom Power. As an important priority, Nick will be working closely with the existing international and regional forums, particularly the International Energy Agency and the Carbon Sequestration Leadership Forum, in order to define their separate roles and responsibilities, so that we together can maximise the positive impact we can have together through the agency of this GCCSI.
Why is the GCCSI needed? The GCCSI will drive global cooperation on a key component of the solution to climate change. We know that the global community will only solve the challenge of climate change if it works together. Notwithstanding the impact of the global recession, our world is still riding an upward curve of greenhouse gas emissions, an upward curve that carries the threat of accelerating climate change impacts.
Coal is the greatest single contributor to greenhouse gases emissions created by human activity. The underlying demand for coal as a source of energy for electricity generation continues to grow. If we are to respond effectively to the enormous threat of climate change, across the world we must increase energy efficiency, diversify into less carbon-intensive energy sources and crucially we must reduce carbon emissions from fossil fuels. This will require investments across the world in research and in technology solutions that can reduce greenhouse gas emissions, while also ensuring energy security. But we need to develop those solutions fast. We do not have any more time to waste.
Globally, the latency of greenhouse gas emissions means that for every day we delay global action on climate change, we intensify the long-term impacts of global warming. We face an enormous global challenge in reconciling the irresistible force of growing global demand for energy and the immovable reality that we must act to combat climate change.
In the years to 2025  -  a mere 16 years - the world's urban population is forecast to grow by 1.4 billion people. More than 60 per cent of that population growth will occur in Asia alone. That means 840 million more people in Asia consuming electricity and fuel, as they move towards living standards that we in the developed world take for granted.
Of course, the two emerging giants are China and India, giants that are hungry for cheap energy to power their growth. Giants, therefore, hungry for coal and that between them, hold around one-fifth of the world's coal reserves. By 2030 around one quarter of global electricity production will be from coal-fired power stations in China and India.
There is no single solution to climate change. We need to act on every front to implement solutions to the challenge of climate change.
Given the trajectory of increased coal consumption in the decades ahead, carbon capture and storage is crucially important to solving the global challenge of climate change. It is therefore urgent that we drive an international portfolio of industrial scale CCS demonstration projects. Industrial scale demonstration CCS projects.
In July last year, the G8 group of leading economies endorsed an International Energy Agency and Carbon Sequestration Leadership Forum recommendation and committed to at least 20 fully-integrated, industrial-scale projects by 2010, in order to achieve the broad deployment of CCS by 2020. The clock is ticking.
Following the G8 decision, the Australian Government commissioned the Boston Consulting Group to review the status of CCS projects worldwide. That report found that although there are several important demonstrations of both capture and storage, there are at present no integrated industrial-scale CCS projects anywhere in the world. Our conclusion was that more, a lot more, needed to be done if the G8 goal is to be achieved.
I then announced the Australian Global CCS Institute in September and we commissioned Bostons to develop a business model for the Institute. The proposed business model was then tested at a preparatory meeting in London in November, where the basic structures were debated and agreed. Now, here in Canberra in April 2009, we are taking the Institute to the next stage with specific work plans and governance structures.
The task of this Institute  -  along with the International Energy Agency and the Carbon Sequestration Leadership Forum  -  is to work together to achieve this goal, alongside the IEA's target of carbon capture and storage contributing one fifth of all global emissions reductions by 2050. We need to support the targeted research and development necessary to advance the commercialisation of this technology. And we need to create a regulatory environment that will encourage private investment in CCS.
I believe the Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute will be a key driver in achieving each of these objectives globally. Getting large scale demonstration projects underway is not easy, I acknowledge that. It's hard work and in the context of a severe global recession, it has become much harder.
That's why cooperation between governments and industry participants is more urgent than ever before and that's why this GCCSI is such an important initiative for the environment, the economy, for industry and for jobs.
The GCCSI was built on the excellent work already being done in many of the member countries represented in this room and by many of the companies and organisations that are here today as well. Australia will be making a strong contribution as the host of the GCCSI, as a major driver of CCS projects.
Last year the Australian Parliament passed the world's most comprehensive legal framework for carbon capture and storage  -  the Offshore Petroleum and Greenhouse Gas Storage Act. The establishment of an effective regulatory regime for the allocation of storage sites is an important step forward in advancing the commercial application of the CCS technology.
As the Institute scales up its activities, projects for carbon capture and storage are also advancing around the world and around Australia. Agencies such as Geoscience Australia, the Cooperative Research Centre for Greenhouse Technologies, the Centre for Low Emission Technology and the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation, the CSIRO, have a wide range of research projects underway.
At the end of last month, the Australian Government announced the world's first commercial release of greenhouse gas acreage for industry. Ten offshore areas have been released to allow industry to undertake further assessment of potentially viable greenhouse gas storage sites. Australia is also working with other stakeholders to undertake world-class CCS research, development and demonstration.
The Cooperative Research Centre for Greenhouse Gas Technologies has commenced a project demonstrating that up to 100,000 tonnes of CO2, extracted from a nearby natural accumulation, can be safely piped, injected and stored.
At Callide in Queensland, construction is underway on a demonstration project that involves the world's first conversion of an existing coal fired generator to capture CO2 using oxyfuel combustion. This project is being undertaken by a consortium from Australia and Japan and I thank our Japanese friends for their help.
The government has also provided funding to the Commonwealth Scientific Industrial and Research Organisation, the CSIRO, to undertake Post Combustion Capture trials at two power stations in Australia and two in China. And I thank the cooperation from our friends in China on this project as well. The first of the China trials commenced at Beijing's Gaobeidian power station in August last year. There is work underway in Australia, we are working already with projects abroad but this, my friends and colleagues, is but the beginning.
To conclude, carbon capture and storage is not the only answer to the climate change challenge. But it is a very important part of the global transition to a lower carbon global economy, a transformation of the global economy every bit as significant as the industrial revolution in the 18th century and the information revolution of recent times.
Australia's leadership in establishing the GCCSI reflects the importance of coal to our economy. Australia has a major stake in the fossil fuel industries, as do many of the Institute's members. Australia is the world's largest exporter of coal and the fifth largest exporter of LNG. We have just below one-tenth of the world's known coal reserves. Coal has been a major contributor to our nation's prosperity and that of many of our trading partners. But with that prosperity also comes a responsibility.
The GCCSI shows Australia is acting on this responsibility. Acting on this responsibility and also preparing for one of the greatest long-term challenges facing Australia and facing our global community, our global environment and our global economy.
Australia's leadership in establishing the GCCSI reflects the importance of coal to our economy. But the Institute is not just about coal, it is about capturing CO2 from any fossil fuel source and permanently removing it from the atmosphere. It's also important for oil and gas and I acknowledge the participation from companies in this sector as well, in particular Chevron's plans for north-western Australia.
To each of you participating in the work of the Institute, I want you to know that your work is important, vitally important. Important for the prosperity and livelihoods of millions of people around the world now and vitally important for those who will come after them.
When we announced this initiative some seven months ago, I said that it had two components; a Global Institute and a commitment to invest in CCS demonstration projects in Australia. And I confirm to each and every one of you in this room today at this important international conference, that this Government will honour those commitments - to the Global Institute, to its future operations and to invest in CCS demonstration projects.
That is why the Australian Government has advanced significant funding for this Institute already. But this Australian initiative will not succeed unless we are working seamlessly with the world. Together we can achieve great things. Together we can achieve great things. Separately we will not achieve nearly as much.
That's why I appeal to each and every one of you to get behind this Institute, to bring your energy, your talents, your expertise, your networks and collective efforts to make this Institute, this initiative a success. Enormous responsibility rests on the shoulders of those of you in this room today. Governments can go so far and this Government, the Government of Australia can take this project so far. It is only by the active, personal, political, diplomatic, corporate, financial, technology-based expertise and the enormous networks represented in this room that we can turn this vision into a reality. There is therefore an enormous weight of responsibility on your collective shoulders and I am confident that you will rise to that challenge.
Together therefore let us resolve to throw our every effort at making a lasting and real difference on climate change through this critical technology; for the future of our planet, the future of our economy and the future of the peoples of the world.


Each of us is here today because of a bloke who has shown incredible leadership, incredible vision and incredible courage. 
He's inspired us, each and everyone of us.
He's challenged us, each and everyone of us.
And for many of us here today, he's also become a friend. And I now regard Chris O'Brien as a friend of mine.
And we're here today together, to launch the new Sydney Cancer Centre  -  Lifehouse at RPA.
I wanted this thing to be called the Chris O'Brien Cancer Centre, and his response to me was ' not on your nelly'.
I wanted to name it this because I thought it was a proud product of his vision, his determination and his leadership.
And again his response was a firm and irrevocable ‘no'.
And what I've learnt over the last couple of years of knowing this bloke is you don't cross him. It's not worth the trouble. So I haven't.
And hence we have the name of this great institution, of this great institute, which is before you today.
And Chris has defied all the odds for the aggressive, highly malignant brain tumour that he was diagnosed with back in 2006.
The diagnosis that was delivered like a “hammer blow”, as he says in his book, Never Say Die, his wonderful autobiography that I had the privilege of launching last year.
A diagnosis delivered with no hope for the future.
They gave him six months just back then.
And he's here with us today fighting on.
And all the way along, Chris has kept battling for his vision for integrated cancer care.
A vision for the new Sydney Cancer Centre to be a true centre for excellence that brings all the elements of cancer treatment together within a single facility.
So that patients diagnosed with cancer no longer have to feel they're on their own in finding their way through all the different elements of dealing with their illness.
Others would have been devastated by a cancer diagnosis.
But Chris has truly transformed personal adversity into national opportunity.
An opportunity to understand cancer treatment from the other side of the doctor's desk.
An opportunity to fight so much harder for cancer patients and their families.
And an opportunity to achieve lasting change in the way we treat and prevent cancer in Australia.
I know Chris doesn't want us only talking about him today  -  no matter how much he has been an inspiration for so many of us.
After all, Chris hasn't been fighting for himself.
He's been fighting for each and every one of us.
There is no Australian, literally no Australian, who goes through life without being touched by cancer in some way.
Whether it's in their own diagnosis, or that of a family member, or a friend, or a workmate.
All of us are affected by cancer in one way or another. I remember as a child my mum being diagnosed with breast cancer. I was three or four years old. She was 39 years old.
Mum survived and died at the ripe old age of 83. Having been a marvelous mother and friend to me.
In the end however she died of lung cancer. And died as someone had been a teetotaler and a non-smoker all her life.
Cancer touches us all in one way or another.
And because cancer is a personal story for so many of us, it is also therefore a national story for all of us.
And all of us have a stake in improving cancer prevention, detection, treatment and cure.
The fact is, cancer steals away too many lives, far too many lives.
Before the age of 85, one in two Australian men and one in three Australian women will be diagnosed with cancer.
It claims up to 40 thousand Australian lives each year  -  making it the leading cause of death.
And cancer numbers will only increase as the population ages and grows  -  making cancer one of our greatest health challenges for the future.
Of course cancer is not just one disease  -  there are many different types of cancer.
For some cancers, treatment is very successful.
Five year survival rates for breast cancer and melanoma are now around 90 per cent.
Other cancers however, are far more biologically aggressive.
There are the ones that pose the greatest challenge. There are those which are more manageable.
And they are why the word “cancer” still strikes such fear for all of us when we are in a doctor's waiting room.
The reality is -  - thanks to our great doctors and support staff like many of you here today -  - a cancer diagnosis is not a death sentence.
No matter the diagnosis there is always some hope.
Each year in Australia, there are more people surviving cancer, and living beyond it.
Indeed 60 per cent of Australian men and 65 per cent of women are alive five years after their cancer diagnosis.
By international standards, our cancer survival rates in Australia are high.
But we can as a nation do much, much better.
I want to advance a vision for Australia. For us to become world leaders in cancer detection, in cancer treatment, and in cancer research.
As we improve early detection and treatment, we can improve the body's capacity to fight cancer, and we can continue to improve survival rates.
And we can greatly reduce the stress and anxiety of the cancer journey for patients and for their families.
This is central to the vision for integrated cancer care centres like the new Sydney Integrated Cancer Care Centre  -  Lifehouse at the RPA.
The integration of cancer care  -  represented by Lifehouse  -  is the next great step forward in our battle with cancer. Our national battle with cancer.
It is also the next step forward in the Australian Government's health reform agenda.
I am proud to be here today with my colleague and friend Nicola Roxon, the Health Minister, to launch the new Sydney Cancer Centre  -  Lifehouse at the RPA.
Because this centre offers one the best models of care delivery in the world.
It brings clinical care, research and education, and outreach into a single organisation.
As Chris has long argued from experience in the United States where there are over 60 such centres, integrated cancer centres radically lift excellence in treatment, excellence in care, and excellence in research - each informing the other on the way through.
I remember sitting down for the first time with Chris when I was back as Leader of the Opposition, I seem to remember over a coffee in the attic of a hotel. As he carefully, painstakingly, for a poor political brain such as mine, unfolded the concept of what integrated cancer care was. And after a half an hour conversation, I finally got it. It stuck with me since. And that's why I'm here today.
Medical research supports the case for centres such as this.
It's also just a matter of common sense.
As Chris says if Australia can create world-leading facilities for entertainment and sport, why in heaven's name, can't we equally have world leading clinical and research facilities to fight one of the nation's biggest killers?
Well Chris, that's what we intend to do.
The Lifehouse at RPA will offer all types of cancer treatment including chemotherapy, radiation, surgery, supportive care and complementary therapies.
Lifehouse at RPA will operate as an independent not-for-profit charitable organisation, treating both public and private patients.
More cancer patients will also be able to take part in potentially life-saving clinical trials, especially for selected uncommon and more complex cancers.
The Integrated Cancer Centre  -  the Lifehouse at RPA  -  aims to increase patient participation in clinical trials from the current level of about 8 per cent to something approaching 20 per cent or more.
That means we can undertake more research and undertake better research.
And that means faster breakthroughs in improving patient care.
And with a centre of excellence such as this Australia will do better in attracting and retaining the best medical professionals from across Australia and across the world.
The centre will also give young cancer specialists, researchers and medical staff first-rate training and experience, helping us develop a new generation of world class cancer experts.
Mentoring young staff has always been integral to Chris' vision for the practice of medicine, as readers of his autobiography can attest.
And that vision will be reflected here at Lifehouse RPA as well.
There'll also be partnerships developed with other research networks, including the University of Sydney, the Garvan St Vincents Campus Cancer Centre and the Centenary Institute.
The vision for Lifehouse at RPA is an inspiring vision. It's a good vision. It's a right vision for the nation.
And that's why last year I came here to announce that the Australian Government would give $50 million to the Sydney Cancer Centre Foundation for Lifehouse at the RPA.
But the Sydney Cancer Centre Foundation still needs another $200 million to bring the full vision of the Integrated Cancer Centre to life.
So Chris, I'm back again today, to announce that the Commonwealth will be tripling its contribution.
In addition to the $50 million we announced last year, the Government will now provide an additional funding of $100 million to the Sydney Cancer Foundation.
And there's one reason for that, and that's you mate.
With the additional $100 million that I am announcing today, the Commonwealth is now providing half of the $300 million required for the Lifehouse.
That takes us a long way towards delivering the vision for this new Sydney Integrated Cancer Centre.
Today, I'm also delighted to launch the Chris O'Brien Capital Appeal for the Sydney Cancer Centre Foundation with the goal of raising a further $50 million.
Chris' model of an Integrated Cancer Centre will be a centrepiece of the Australian Government's vision of tackling cancer over the coming years.
This will be part of our national vision to deliver integrated cancer services across the nation.
Eighteen months ago, I said that I believed Australians were sick of the blame game between different levels of government, and sick of no one taking responsibility just for making things work.
I promised Australians that if elected as Prime Minister, I would work hard to end the blame game.
One of the first things I identified was that we needed to make sure that we deal with the historical underinvestment in cancer services.
Since taking office a little more than 12 months ago, the Australian Government has invested more than $250 million in Cancer alone. This includes:
     * $87.4 million for a national bowel cancer screening program;
     * $30 million for cancer centres in Melbourne, and Adelaide;
     * $15 million for prostate cancer research centres in Brisbane and Melbourne;
     * $31 million for a new program to provide for the first time a nationally consistent framework for financial support for women who require external breast prostheses as a result of breast cancer;
     * $15 million to better support adolescents and young adults living with cancer through youth cancer networks; and
     * $12 million for the McGrath Foundation for breast cancer nurses.
Today, we open a new chapter in the Government's commitment to tackling cancer.
Lifehouse at RPA will deal with uncommon, more complex and potentially untreatable cancers that can only be managed by co-located expert teams.
It will also manage a high caseload of the more common, large volume cancers.
This unique combination of roles will place Lifehouse at RPA at the centre of what will be a rolling agenda across the nation for the Government.
An agenda to develop better access to cancer care through connected services  -  which put the patient's needs at the centre of the system. 
An agenda with a long term goal of delivering consistent best practice treatment across our nation.
And the result is that we can deliver real improvements in patient care.
And we, the Australian Government will be putting our shoulder to the wheel.
And you, the business community and the wider community can also put your shoulder to the wheel, by contributing to the Sydney Cancer Centre Foundation.
Together, we will deliver on Chris O'Brien's vision and deliver a state-of-the-art, world-class integrated cancer care centre that will set the benchmark for cancer treatment around the nation.
Capital works, as indicated just before, should commence later this year, with Lifehouse officially opening in 2012.
This new Sydney Integrated Cancer Care Centre  -  Lifehouse at RPA will also be the first project to be funded from the Australian Government's Health and Hospitals Fund. Another first for the nation.
Important in generating economic activity and jobs on the way through. Critically important in building the health infrastructure we need for our nation's future.
An important part of the Australian Government's investment in our nation's long-term challenges.
I would like to conclude by making a few final remarks of a more personal nature about our friend, and about my friend, Chris O'Brien.
Chris' experience with cancer has given him the moral authority to push, to advocate this model of integrated cancer care to the highest offices in the land.
You've succeeded.
In the two years since I met Chris I've come to know him deeply. To respect him deeply. To admire him deeply. To love him deeply as a first class human being.
He embodies the finest traditions of the medical profession.
It's one of the terrible ironies of life that a man like Chris would be diagnosed with the very type of cancer he did so much to fight against in his own patients.
But Chris has made much good of it.
He's shared with us his cancer journey.
And on the way he's kept reminding us  -  if it's been tough on someone as knowledgeable and as optimistic as Chris, what's it like for ordinary Australians who have to negotiate their way through the complex web of health services without any inside knowledge.
And imagine how much harder all that would have been without the love and support of Gail, Adam, Juliette and James, and the whole team here at this centre.
Chris' message has been so very practical.
As he's said, sometimes it comes down to little things like the difference of being driven into hospital each day by Gail for treatment, while one of his patients had to catch two buses to get there.
That's what we've come to love about this bloke  -  a profound compassion for his fellow human beings.
His visceral reaction to injustice and to human suffering.
And his profound sense of duty to use his great talents to very good ends.
If there's any young man or woman out there wondering whether a life in science or medicine is worth the years of struggle and hard work, Chris' life should resolve that question for you.
This bloke is an inspiration. An example to the next generation of health professionals.
His vision for Lifehouse at RPA will come to fruition.
And it will not only benefit those living with cancer now.
It will leave a profound legacy for generations to come.
In ten years' time, in twenty years' time, in thirty years' time, who knows what breakthroughs will be made possible because of this model.
And for this Chris, the nation thanks you.
I'm proud to be here today with a friend, a fighter and a builder, of our nation's vision for the future.
Together, together. All of us here assembled, will deliver on this, your vision.
For Sydney, and for the nation, and to make Australia a world leader in this critical area of integrated cancer care.
Cancer won't wait for the global economy to recover.
So please, do all you can now to support the Chris O'Brien Capital Appeal.
Because this truly will change the lives of many Australians now, and in the years to come.
This is what being Australian is all about.
Looking out for each other.
Looking out for each other when times are tough.
And it is my great honour therefore, to launch the Chris O'Brien Capital Appeal for this new Sydney Integrated Cancer Centre  -  Lifehouse at RPA. 


Thanks very much for the warm Adelaide welcome. And it's great to be back into the city of my wife's birth, and a city which I've come to know and love over many years now.
The list of representatives of federal, state and local government have all been acknowledged appropriately and I don't choose to repeat them. Other than to say this, that the reason we are gathered here today in Adelaide is to talk about something which is important for the nation, important for this community.
And that is what do we do about cushioning the impact of this global economic recession from the lives, the working lives and families and community life of this important part of the Australian family.
This is as much a question about national economic policy as it is about how we work together effectively, as all levels of government work effectively as local community representatives and business representatives to make a difference.
In the last few weeks since returning from the G20 Summit in London, I've attended two gatherings like this around the country. As I got off the plane from London, I went to Melbourne and spoke to a gathering of about this size, from a community there which is suffering the direct impact of the global economic recession on them, and we spent time working through what we could do to make a difference there.
Not to promise the undeliverable which is to say that this global economic recession can be wished away, you can't do that. But to engage in very practical business of what you can do to reduce its impact.
And a week later I did the same in north western Tasmania where again the impact on local jobs is being felt sharply and keenly. And now, here in Adelaide where I know in this part of Australia, particularly given the concentration of manufacturing jobs, but particularly given the weaknesses which are emerging in that sector of the economy nationally and globally, the effects are also real.
It's an important opportunity also for us to remind ourselves that when we look at the statistics on unemployment, when we look at the statistics on economic growth, when we look at the statistics on trade, at one level these are pieces of economic data. And they guide and shape the decisions which policy makers must take.
But at a quite different level, each of these represents a human being. Each of these represents a family. Each of these represents the impact on a local school community. Each of these represents an impact on the fabric of a local community more broadly.
And part of our challenge as Australians in dealing with the impact of the global economic recession is this - to remind ourselves afresh on every day that we get up, on every day that we confront the global economic news, to recall and to record and to remind ourselves that Australians of one core principle and it is as follows  -  we are all in this together, each and every one of us.
Doesn't matter what part of the country we're from. Doesn't matter whether we're from business, whether we're from the unions, whether from the community sector, the church sector, the charitable sector, whether we're from federal government, state government or local government.
We are all in this together. And the actions we take together are infinitely more powerful, infinitely more potent, if they are taken together in a coordinated manner, one reinforcing the other.
The worst thing that can happen and you see this occurring in various societies and countries around the world, is where the impact of external economic shock fractures societies, fractures local communities. That's not the Australian way, that's not the way in which we design, that's not part of the Australian DNA. We're actually designed to do things differently.
At our absolute best we are a mob who get on with the business of sorting out practical solutions, looking after each other on the way through in the hard times. And that's what we are here to do.
Not to engage in the unrealistic politics of saying you can wish these things away. You can't. The fact is, you're all familiar with, you've read the international media, you've read the reports, you understand what's happening with the global economy.
But the core challenge is how do we cushion the impact in communities such as this and economies such as this, in order to make a difference in the lives of local business people, the lives of local workers, the lives and fabric of local communities, until such time as we can negotiate a trajectory for global economic recovery.
When I was in London recently, we sat down as the G20, the Group of 20 leaders from the largest economies in the world. As I listened to the presentations from my colleagues from all parts of the world, the President of Communist China, the President of capitalist America, the King of Saudi Arabia, and all points in between, what was extraordinary was the commonality of the challenge.
That is, all government leaders from whatever political systems they came from, whatever part of the world they came from, wrestling with this extraordinary event which has occurred - the worst in three-quarters of a century of global economic history.
Let's make no mistake about it. This global economic recession is the worst global recession we have seen since the 1930s. That's the reality. And each economy, each country, each society, is seeking to work effectively to respond to the challenge which has been presented to it.
But my comments to my colleagues from around the world, was the same that I've reflected to you here in Adelaide this morning. And that is, we are all in this together. Because this is not a time with such a globalised economy for an individual national economy to think that they can somehow wave a magic wand and produce a solution to the problem. They cannot.
However, if you do act together, and do act together effectively, you can begin to chart a strategy for economic recovery, and you can cushion the impact of the global economic recession on the way through.
If you look at the London Communiqué a couple of weeks ago, that's what the leaders of 20 or so governments from around the world sought to do. And we came out with a positive declaration as to the course of action that we would embrace.
One, that as governments around the world, we would engage in the business of economic stimulus. Because as governments around the world, we concluded that if you simply stand back and allow the ravages of this recession to wash over people's shores, then the impact is extraordinary. And we need to reduce that impact on the way through.
Trillions of dollars of invested activity by governments around the world in a coordinated action since we first met in Washington in November last year, through until March/April this year. Were that not the case, the tens of millions of people around the world who would now be out of work would be extraordinary. Again not eliminating the problem of unemployment but reducing it.
Similarly, dealing with the problem which lies at the core of the global economic crisis which is the state and the financial health of our principle financial institutions. Dealing with that in an effective way which makes a difference.
In the professional debate it's called how do you manage and restore to health toxic assets on the balance sheets of the world's most principal financial institutions. And there was a problem there. But what we agreed in London was a framework , an international framework which we assisted in crafting as Australia for the world's largest private banks to resolve their balance sheet difficulties, their toxic or impaired assets over time with one objective  -  to restore private credit flows to something approaching normal.
Because until that happens, the flow of credit through to Australian financial institutions and the flow of credit from those institutions and through those institutions to businesses which make a difference to employment here in this community in Adelaide is suspended.
And thirdly, a combined piece of action we did was this. We agreed to provide proper resources for the International Monetary Fund. And you might say well what on earth has that got to do with me here? Let me explain it. Right now there are emerging problems in the economies of Central and Eastern Europe, and in their financial institutions. And if they are not dealt with in an effective way, that will in turn ricochet back into the financial institutions of the rest of the world, and we'll have a second round effect of what we've already seen over the last year or so.
We don't want that to happen. And therefore, what we sought to do in London was to say, here is the international global institution which is relevant to handling these challenges, the International Monetary Fund. How do we make sure that it's got sufficient resources to deal with the challenge?
And how do we know, and how can we ensure that it's got the policy flexibility to act early and decisively and effectively, with financial institutions which show themselves to be in diabolical trouble in the emerging economies of Central and Eastern Europe. And that was core to the decisions we took in London as well.
Absent that with those problems emerging, the crisis of confidence which then could prospectively emerge in other financial institutions around the world, would pose great consequences for us all.
And finally, to work together on designing the rules for the future global financial system. None of us want to see what is happened most recently happen again. None of us want to see such unrestrained greed at work, inappropriately regulated by the rules governing financial markets and financial institutions.
And the resolve of governments around the world is to make a fundamental change to the way in which we design the rules of the system. Complex work, detailed work, now charged with the appropriate institutions working for us. To make sure that we get the balance right in the future between proper regulation and to ensure still, that there is sufficient flexibility for the private economy to get out there and do its thing as well.
And to draw a line also as governments around the world on the challenge of protectionism. Some people will argue that the best way to handle this challenge of the global economic crisis is to shut the gate. And that is that if you keep out imports from the rest of the world, it's the best way ahead.
Can I say that if every government did that around the world, where do you think we'd land up? If you had retaliatory action of that order of magnitude across the world today, then Australia's export markets would shrink and disappear.
And if there's one core lesson to learn from the events of the 1930s, it is this - when you are faced with a synchronised global economic recession, don't make it worst by erecting protectionist barriers against one another, because you take what is already a bad situation and make it much, much worse.
You shrink the global economy even more. You shrink jobs even more. You shrink those businesses which here depend on exports for their survival.
For the good news I have for you, coming out of the events in London, is that global governments in their own imperfect way, given the fact that global governments like domestic governments are made up of politicians and you may have observed, that there are some flaws in our political processes, and there are even some flaws in the politicians themselves. And none of us have perfect knowledge.
But the good news I have for you today is that governments meeting around the world in London were faced with two stark choices. To retreat into themselves and to take uncoordinated national actions against one another, or to act as a community of governments. And the good news so far is that they have taken the second course of action.
As we met at No.10, I also reminded my colleagues from around the world that there was a similar meeting in London in 1933. They brought together representatives from the economies affected by the events of '29-32 to London for a global conference on the global economy and its future directions in 1933. 66 economies from around the world.
It was a complete unmitigated disaster. And the result was the construction of protectionist walls. The extension of the economic pain of the early '30s throughout the '30s, and we know the consequences which then erupted by the end of the '30s.
That is one script which is alive to the world community and presents itself as a possibility. It's not one which this government of Australia will ever be party to. This government of Australia is into the business of how you cooperate and coordinate your actions with your colleagues and counterpart governments from around the world.
But let us be clear about the dimensions of the challenge. I've described the global action that we have taken, but let's be very clear about what we now face. 28 of the 30 most developed economies in the world are already in recession, or have experienced at least one quarter of negative economic growth in 2008.
Be very clear about that - 28 of the 30 most developed economies in the world are either already in recession, or have already experienced one quarter of negative economic growth.
Second, seven of Australia's 10 largest trading partners are already in recession. Seven of them. The severity of the global recession has made it impossible for Australia to avoid a further period of negative economic growth.
The worst global economic recession in 75 years means it's inevitable that Australia too will be dragged into recession. The challenge for government is to cushion the impact of the recession on businesses and jobs, through the actions we take through our economic stimulus strategy.
That brings me too what we do nationally. I've described so far what we've sought to do internationally. Our national actions have sought to be consistent with the principles of how do you deal with maintaining financial stability in the here and now. How do you also deal with providing jobs and stimulus and support for business and the economy on the way through.
On providing stability for our financial system, the terrible and dark days of last October need to be reprised for us all. Following the collapse of Lehmann's in the United States, there was an audible tremor across the global economy as financial systems around the world began to shake and financial institutions, some of them, collapsed.
The actions we took in October last year to provide a guarantee for bank deposits for Australian bank deposit holders in banks, building societies, credit unions across Australia, the first time this has ever been provided in the history of the Commonwealth, is absolutely fundamental to maintaining confidence and stability in the Australian financial system.
For those who have from time to time chosen to criticise that decision, I ask them one simple question: And what was the alternative? And furthermore, what would have happened had we not taken that early and decisive action, clear for all to see?
And parallel to that, to engage also in an unprecedented position to provide government guarantees for the term wholesale funding or inter-bank lending of Australia's banks to make sure that their lines of credit could remain alive from around the world.
Why is all that important? Because such a large slab of the finance which is delivered into local businesses in this community here comes through the Australian banks, a slab of which in turn is accessed through their access to global capital markets.
And if that tap was being turned off as it was in the last months of last year, we had to find a radical means by which to turn it back on. And we did so. And we do not apologise for it. It was absolutely the right thing to do. Tough, early, decisive action necessary to stabilise the financial system of Australia.
And if I look at the comparisons between the stability of our financial system in the months since then against what is occurred in so many economies around the world, this was the right thing to do.
Stimulus, however, to provide support for jobs and businesses in the interim is of equal importance. And that's why from day one, the Government has also embraced an economic stimulus strategy. Not for the sake of simply spending money, but for the sake of stepping in to provide support for the private economy when it's taken such a battering, when businesses are taking such a battering through no fault of their own through the global factors that I've described before.
And so that's why we took a decision unapologetically to step in and say we will support the one and a half million Australians who work in the Australian retail sector by providing support to pensioners, veterans, carers, families in need of support to make sure that the retail sector would get a necessary shot in the arm on the way through in order to support the one and a half million Australians who work out there in that sector. And the businesses who provide so much of the products which are sold in our major retail outlets.
Secondly, if you look at the international economic data of what happened around the rest of the world when governments, countries and economies did not act to support consumption in their economies, did not act to support retail employment, the absolute killing fields that you have seen in retail sectors around the world as people have lost their jobs, hand over fist.
Compare and contrast what happened with Australia's retail sales figures for the December quarter last year and into the first months of this year against most other economies in the world. There is one difference between our performance and that of the economies around the rest of the world, and that is that we intervened, acted decisively to provide direct and deliberate support for consumption in the economy through the payments we made to pensioners, carers and to others, for which we make absolutely no apology.
The consequence in terms of employment in the retail sector and the roll on consequences of so many people in retail losing their jobs, had we not taken that action, would have been catastrophic for the general economy.
Consumption, however, and support for that sort of short term stimulus is one thing, it's also creating for us time to invest in long term infrastructure of the type that we need for the future and to provide also an opportunity for stimulus and the creation of jobs on the way through. That is why we have invested in a $30 billion nation building and jobs plan. The $30 billion nation building and jobs plan is about one thing: how do you provide as much activity and support for jobs in the economy now, most particularly through construction, and at the same time build the infrastructure we need for the 21st Century?
That's why in that $30 billion injection into the national economy we've embraced three main projects.
One, out there with the single largest school modernisation that this country has ever seen, $15 billion to build state of the art libraries, 21st Century libraries for our primary schools to make sure that they have the best by way of multi-purpose halls. That our secondary schools have access to the best science centres, the best language centres. And to do all these things in a way which makes our schools the best schools that we can have for the 21st Century and on the way through, turning every single primary school in Australia into a construction site with no apology.
The whole purpose is to make sure that we are generating economic activity here at the grassroots in the schools in these communities here in Adelaide. Each one of them now working with their State Education Authorities or in the case of the Catholics or the independents, their respective education authorities to make sure that you're getting the best deal possible for the new and additional classrooms or facilities that you want to build at a particular local school.
The objective? Build the education revolution for the future. Make sure that we have state of the art teaching infrastructure for the future and at the same time generating tens of thousands of jobs on the way through: tradies, sparkies, electricians, those who are concerned and engaged in the business of design and project management and project completion. That's what it's about.
The other part to it is this, as I look across the nation and I've looked carefully at the census date in recent years about the level of homelessness in Australia, how can we have according to the census data in a country such as this 100,000 Australians who are still homeless? And so what we committed ourselves to do some time ago when we produced our Homelessness White Paper was to ensure that we radically invested in the amount of social housing available in Australia because there is a huge undersupply of social housing.
And the one directly relates to the other. You have a whole lot of people who are homeless because we have such a radical undersupply of social housing. And again what the Government has done through a $6 billion investment is to undertake the biggest single national investment in social housing that the country has ever seen. 20,000 units of social housing right across the country, in order to make a difference, in order to make a radical difference. Of course the work will still not be complete as far as homelessness is concerned. But it is the single largest step in responding to the challenge that the country has seen so far. But critically, employing and creating jobs for people in housing construction.
The third thing we have done, complementary to the second, is of course to introduce a First Home Owner's Boost. Treble the rate if you're out there buying a new house, double the rate if your new home is an existing dwelling and again I ask you to look carefully at the economic data. Look at the housing construction statistics for Australia since the end of last year to the early part of this year relative to any other economy in the developed world and ask yourself this question: why are we doing better? It ain't perfect, it's still taking a battering but relative to the rest of the world let me tell you it is a significant and radical improvement.
And that is because you have these arms of Government policy directly engaged saying we can help first home buyers take advantage of low interest rates by getting into the housing market by trebling the first home owner's grant on a temporary basis in order to provide people with the incentive to enter and secondly this significant injection in social housing at the same time, as well as some of the other housing initiatives which the Minister Tanya Plibersek currently has underway.
The housing data is extraordinary relative to the rest of the world. And when I look at housing construction I say to myself, this helps preserve asset prices for working Australian families across the country, it also helps provide employment in local communities across the country and keep going a vital industry which is taking an absolute pounding in so many other parts of the world.
The third part of what we've done or the fourth part of what we've done on stimulus is this. Looking again to the future and what do we do to act to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. The decision we took is that a practical ambition for the nation was to ensure that each owner occupied dwelling in Australia should have ceiling insulation, pulling out the equivalent of 50 million tonnes of greenhouse gas equivalents across the country. A massive investment in energy efficiency, a massive investment in reducing electricity costs for families across the country and a $4 billion investment on our part therefore to work with the industry in supplying insulation material, the transportation of insulation material, the installation of insulation material and all the things that support that and the jobs and employment process, again making a difference in terms of local employment.
So my message to you as this community is that what you see us doing nationally on the question of supporting stability in the financial system and providing economic stimulus on the way through to cushion the effect of this recession on local communities is of the type that I've just described. These are not just a series of statistics which are put out from the nation's capital, they reflect concrete projects on the ground in each community across the nation, including those here as well.
If I was to look for example at the impact of what's underway with some of these decisions here in these suburbs of Adelaide, the impact of the school program for example is significant. 237 schools in northern and western Adelaide regions of South Australia will be eligible to share in approximately $454 million under the plan that I've just described. This is not a small amount of money, this is not sort of a (inaudible) press release from you know someone on the edge of a Friday news cycle. This is real money, real investment in order to make a real difference in these communities. That's half a billion dollars spread across 237 schools in these regions of South Australia.
This comprises $419 million under the primary schools for the 21st Century program and up to $35 million under the National School Pride program. 158 schools in this region have already had schools approved under round one of the National School Pride program, this is for much-needed maintenance programs by the way, within schools and that in itself totals $23.5 million. This include $5.7 million allocated to schools in the electorate of Makin such as the Modbury Special School and Golden Grove High School for refurbishments and reconstruction. $8.3 million allocated to schools in Wakefield such as the Gawler High School and Elizabeth North Primary School for refurbishments and construction.
These funds also build on what we've invested in trades training centres and the provision of computers for the 21st Century. $16.6 million for three trades training centres benefiting seven schools in Makin and $9.6 million for two projects benefiting eight schools in Wakefield.
And across the computer program, 1,921 new computers in 14 schools have been funded in Makin; 1,780 computers in 19 schools in Wakefield. These are practical investments aimed to make a difference in this local community. A difference in terms of jobs and economic activity but a difference also in terms of what we do to create the best possible learning environment for our kids for the future.
A stimulus of the type that I've described also involves how we engage with the real challenge of local jobs here in communities such as this. The jobs figures coming out of these suburbs has been really bad. I don't intend to gild the lily, let's just be upfront about this. I don't think anyone's interests are served by us pretending a problem doesn't exist when it does. Our responsibility in positions of leadership is to embrace the problem, understand it, explain it and to reduce it. That's the business of practical leadership and that's why we're engaged in these important projects.
Since January 2009, over 450 redundancies have been announced in Northern and Western Adelaide. In Elizabeth, 12 jobs gone at Ceva Logistics, 40 at Exide Technologies, 38 at Hirotech Australia, 49 at Premoso Pty Ltd in Elizabeth South. In Edinburgh, 50 jobs gone at Futuris Automotive Interiors, 24 jobs went at Codan in Newton in February, and 44 at PMP in Salisbury South  -  just to name a few.
That's what's happening and you know it far better than I because these are your communities. The purpose of my mentioning them is to underline the fact that I see, as I underlined before, no point whatsoever in trying to gild the lily about this. This is happening, it's real. Our challenge is to take the bull by the horns and cushion the impact of it through the proposals that we have explained so far and ones which I will now turn to in addition.
When I returned from the G20 I said we needed to act nationally, we needed to act globally but I also said we needed to be acting locally. And I've described already some of the projects which give rise to a credible strategy to see Australia through this global economic recession.
What I described in a speech in Melbourne was that we needed a new compact on jobs and training for Australia to deal with the impact of this global recession. A compact with young Australians who are going to find it tough to land a job out of school or out of university or out of TAFE, and some of them finding it tough to keep a job out of school, out of university or out of TAFE.
Secondly, a compact with workers who have been retrenched through no fault of their own and what we provide to them by way of support.
Thirdly, a compact with local communities so that we can make a further difference on the ground in areas where we have higher levels of unemployment than would be the case nationally.
On a compact with young Australians, we are proposing to the Council of Australian Governments which will meet at the end of April that every young Australian is guaranteed access to a school, apprenticeship or higher education place. The goal is to ensure that our young people are properly skilled when the economy recovers.
We'll also be asking the Council of Australian Governments to lift the mandatory age at which young people must be in school or engaged in training or employment and we'll ask them to bring forward the already agreed Council of Australian Governments' goal of year 12 or equivalent attainment from 2020 down to 2015.
The purpose of these elements of our compact with young Australians is to make a difference because when I look back in economic history, when previous recessions have hit the Australian economy, one of the tragedies which has occurred is that we have lost too many of our young people not just for the one or two years of economic dislocation, then for a generation, then beyond a generation. Our resolve as an the Australian community and our combined resolve as a local community must be to exert every effort from preventing that happening again and that underpins our proposed compact with young Australians. So that with our young people, whatever qualification they may be, for whichever course they may be qualified, be it at university, be it TAFE, be it an apprenticeship, be it at school, that we the Governments of Australia would make that possible for them.
To use this time of economic downturn to obtain new skills to sustain the skills that you've got but also and much more critically to equip yourselves most effectively for the economy once it recovers.
A compact with retrenched Australians. So many Australians through no fault of their own are losing their jobs. One of the key concerns that have been put to us by many people from around the country is what happens if you lose your job and your ability to pay off your mortgage. We've worked with the Australian Big Four banks on a comprehensive package of assistance to working families who lose their jobs. The banks have now indicated to us they will now negotiate with mortgage borrowers suffering from employment hardship to postpone up to 12 months the dates from which payments are due under their mortgage contract, with interest to be capitalised into the loan.
And the banks are also prepared to consider extending the period of the mortgage contract and reducing the amount of each payment due under the contract. They have also indicated that on other loans including car loans they would be prepared to consider providing interest-only repayment options where appropriate. Furthermore they have also indicated their preparedness to consider fee waivers for borrowers in hardship cases.
Of course, these options won't be appropriate in every case. Banks will make assessments based on the borrowers' ability to meet long term contractual obligations. But this is important, there's a set of arrangements with Australia's major banks to remove some of the immediate pressure on families if the breadwinner loses his or her job through no fault of their own and ends up being retrenched.
Finally a compact with local communities. I said before that what we are doing nationally translates through locally in the school projects and the rest. But also what is important to underline here today is what further we can do from the ground up, engaging you as a local community. Each of the projects I've referred to, for example the four to five hundred million dollars in school modernisation projects to generate jobs and activity and opportunities will flow from that.
But we have to be in addition particularly mindful of those areas where there will be high concentrations of unemployment, such as this region. That's why I've announced $20 million for local employment coordinators in the regions most affected by job losses. We will initially appoint them to seven regions including here in the northern and western suburbs of Adelaide. These coordinators will be appointed by next month. In the interim here in Adelaide Lyn Rawley has been appointed to begin the task of working with the local community to identify opportunities at the local level to create and support jobs. She has a long history as a local community champion, having worked with Centrelink previously and with the Commonwealth Employment Service.
The first task of the local employment coordinators will be to identify projects for the Government to support through a special $650 million Local Jobs Fund. Jobs that are ready to go and to work also with proponents for those proposals to ensure effective delivery on time. The coordinator will link with industry and service delivery organisations to identify new jobs in the region and to maximise employment and training opportunities for redundant workers. The intention is for the employment coordinators to work directly with local government in order to make a difference and to coordinate effectively with what local governments have by way of their local, own local infrastructure plans.
We've also been offered the assistance of the Australian trucking industry legend Lindsay Fox who will be working directly with our local employment coordinators across the country alongside Bill Kelty and he'll be providing advice to local employers on practical ways that they can help by keeping on their workers and even taking on new apprentices and employees.
Part of the reason for this discussion this morning, as I conclude my own remarks, is for you to begin to think as a local community about how you could make best access of this Local Jobs Fund to team up with our local priority employment coordinator. This is going to be very important practical work. So much of what I have described so far is what the Government is doing as it works from the national level down but this will only truly work if it is matched by a parallel effort from the community up.
And what I know of Australian communities is that they are full of good ideas, full of good enterprise, full of good initiative, and good and full of good spirit when it comes to making a difference on the ground.
So the challenge I leave you is this. It is not simply to come here and say this is what we're doing, aren't we a bunch of fine fellas. It's to say here actually is a structure. Here is a person. Here is a fund. And here is an opportunity for you as local communities, working in partnership with each other, to make an additional difference as well.
That's the purpose for my being here. To hear from you. From church and charitable organisations, from local chambers of commerce, from local trade unions, from employers. From those who are passionate about the future of their local communities about how we can make this difference also from the ground up.
And you know something? I'm convinced we can make a difference. I'm convinced that if we take to heart the principle that I put to out my colleagues of the G20 meeting only a few weeks ago, that we're all in this together.
That if we're serious about this principle, that we'll make a difference here in this community by being in this together. For the challenge, ladies and gentlemen, lies with you. Work with us. Work through your local members. Work through the local priority employment coordinator. There is no monopoly of wisdom on our part in terms of what's going to work in this community. I know enough about local community life from where I come from the People's Republic of Queensland, that everywhere is different, okay. Everywhere is different. And everyone's got their own best ideas about how things should be done and you've got your own best knowledge and your own best networks.
What I've sought to do is provide the structure and the funding and the personnel to try and make a difference.
Over to you.
[Ends]


I said before it's good to be back in this great city, it's good to be back in this great state of Western Australia. In the 15 months or so that I've been Prime Minister this is the seventh time I've visited and for the future you can expect me back on a regular basis every couple of months or so. 
When I come back here and I'm here, I always learn something. It's not just that you feel welcome in a State like this - coming from the great state of Queensland there are degrees of commonality between our two views on life - but it's also this is a genuine place of excitement and dynamism and what I've described as a positive attitude of having a go.
I think in the great debate about future directions in the economy at present, both in this country and abroad, effectively they're divided into two camps. Those who are prepared to sit at the sidelines and carp and complain and describe everything that is going wrong, and those on the other hand who are prepared to get out there and have a go. Have a go at making a difference, have a go at making a decision, have a go at taking those hard continued decisions about continuing to maintain your economy levels, keeping people in a job, wrestling with the difficult challenges which confront you on a daily basis and a weekly basis as you look at your balance sheets.
That's the positive attitude, the constructive attitude, the engaged attitude that I sense every time I cross the Nullarbor and come here. And it hasn't changed since the global economic circumstances have deteriorated. So I congratulate you as representatives of one of the most dynamic business communities in the country, it's a reputation you deserve.
The facts and figures for Western Australia speak for themselves. WA accounted for 36 per cent of goods exports for the Australian economy  -  more than any other state. WA has been so much the economic powerhouse of Australia and I have absolute confidence that that will continue to be the case and this Government, the one that I lead, intend to be your partners in that pursuit of progress. Of course conditions now are tougher in the global economy. Exports are weakening. Unemployment as you know is rising. It's harder for businesses.
Tomorrow, the International Monetary Fund will release revised forecasts for the global economy. This will be the fifth revision to the IMF's forecasts for 2009 since April of last year. Five sets of revisions. That alone highlights the force with which the global financial crisis has knocked the global economy and its uncertain trajectory.
The outlook for the world economy this year is worse almost than any of us has seen in their lifetime. We are in an exceptionally deep and widespread global recession. 28 of the 30 most developed economies in the world are already in recession or have experienced at least one quarter of negative economic growth in 2008. Seven of Australia's 10 largest trading partners are already in recession.
Today I'd like to spend some time talking to you about four or five challenges we face. Firstly, the key challenges which we the Australian Government confront in framing a national budget in the midst of a global recession.
Secondly, why it is necessary to support economic activity through the agency of Government while the private sector is under stress and difficulty and therefore why it is necessary for governments to engage in temporary deficits and temporary borrowings in order to do so.
Thirdly, to outline our strategy of action: local, national and global to chart a course for this economy through these difficult times which we now confront.
Fourthly, our specific strategy for investment here in Western Australia, and finally what I would describe as a rational basis for hope, optimism and confidence in this State's and this country's economic future.
Global conditions have never played a greater role in the framing of the budget that we now currently confront. Framing the budget in this current context is incredibly tough. Framing the budget in these circumstances has never been framed at a more difficult time. As I have said since the beginning of the global economic storm, Australia is better placed than most other countries as we make our way through this storm. But that doesn't mean we can be immune from such a deep and widespread global slump.
As Glenn Stevens, the Governor of the Reserve Bank, said yesterday and I quote him, “it is very rare for Australia to escape an international downturn and there is no precedent for avoiding one of this size”.
So what is our economic strategy to see Australia through this global crisis and how do we intend to prosecute that in the weeks and months and years that lie ahead?
Let's be clear about the facts. This global economic recession is the worst in 75 years and it has also dragged Australia into recession, and that means higher unemployment, lower government revenues and therefore the toughest Budget to prepare in modern economic history. 
Since the collapse on global financial markets in the second half of last year, the Government has taken strong, early and decisive action through an economic stimulus strategy to support business, to support jobs and to cushion the impact of the global recession on Australia.
That's why a core part of our continuing economic stimulus strategy through the upcoming Budget will be to support business, jobs and confidence - by investing in our nation's future infrastructure, by building the schools of the 21st century and by building long-term infrastructure including a national broadband network. In short, by creating jobs we need for today while building the infrastructure we need for tomorrow.
This global economic recession has also dragged Australia into recession and has also produced the single biggest collapse in government tax revenues in post war Australia. That is why temporary government deficits are necessary and temporary government borrowing necessary as well. Necessary to support businesses and to support jobs until the private sector recovers.
The alternative would be to make the recession worse, throw more people out of work, put greater stress on business, therefore resulting in larger deficits and greater borrowing in terms of Governments.
That is not a responsible economic strategy. The core fact is more than two thirds of the government's temporary deficits and temporary borrowings are exclusively the result of the collapse in government tax revenues brought about by the global recession. Revenues are being hit hard by falling profits, the collapse of capital gains, lower incomes and rising unemployment.
These are basic unalterable facts and that's why we've got to make some tough calls in this year's Budget, which is being ravaged - the economy more broadly - by the impact of the global recession.
Downward revenue revisions have already been published in November's Mid Year Economic, Financial and Fiscal Outlook, and in February's Updated Economic and Fiscal Outlook. In November, those downward revisions in revenue amounted to $40 billion across the forward estimates.
By February, those revisions had risen to $115 billion across the forward estimates. The downward revisions in revenue already announced amount to 63 per cent of the change in next year's Budget outcome since last May. And they make up almost two-thirds of the Government's anticipated borrowing requirements over the forward estimates.
With the further deterioration in the global economy since early February, the revenue outlook and the budget forecasts are now substantially worse than the forecasts released in February. 
In the current unprecedented global conditions, a temporary budget deficit is not an option - it is an inevitability. Every government, every responsible government around the world is being forced into greater levels of temporary borrowing. At the end of last month, the OECD forecast that budget deficits across the OECD will average nearly nine per cent of GDP in the OECD next year and rising.
In this respect it is necessary briefly to touch on the current national political debate over budget policy.
The Leader of the Opposition knows that the Government refusing to engage in temporary but necessary borrowing in the current economic environment would in fact be a recipe for an economic catastrophe in Australia. That is why the Opposition has admitted themselves that they too would also undertake fiscal stimulus and borrowings in the current climate.
It's important to underline some facts here.
In February Mr Turnbull acknowledged that a government led by him would still need to borrow at least $177 billion. At the same time, Mr Turnbull and the Opposition are attempting to criticise this Government's temporary deficit and temporary borrowings. This I would suggest is the very definition of opportunism.
Politics can often be a contest between policy consistency on the one hand and political opportunity on the other. And when it comes to temporary deficit and temporary borrowing I regret to conclude that Mr Turnbull's remarks indicate that he has chosen the opportunistic path.
If Mr Turnbull wants to criticise the temporary, responsible and necessary borrowing by government during a recession, then he should be clear-cut, absolutely clear-cut as to what the alternative strategy is.
Again, the facts are these  -  the collapse in tax revenues and the operation of the automatic stabilisers would result in a budget deficit and borrowings even without a single dollar having been spent on fiscal stimulus.
Therefore, the Opposition Leader needs to explain just how he could deliver fiscal stimulus without undertaking greater borrowings. He needs to explain how he could provide economic stimulus while revenues are collapsing without undertaking further borrowings.
The point I make is this  -  it just doesn't add up, and every mainstream economic commentator knows it doesn't add up.
Our strategy is clear  -  temporary deficits, temporary borrowings are necessary in order to support economic activity in our national economy, including the economy of Western Australia, until such point as the private economy recovers.
This is not a choice, it is a necessity, and it is the right choice under our national economic circumstances at present.
As the Reserve Bank Governor remarked yesterday, macro-economic support for aggregate demand is a condition for economic recovery. Indeed as Mr Stevens said, the role of fiscal policy is more prominent on this occasion than has been the case in many years.
But what is also important, as Governor Stevens noted, is that we articulate also a medium-term path with a budget back towards balance. The Australian Government recognises the importance to confidence of sound public finance and we set out a clear path back to budget surplus.
Our position is that when the economy recovers and grows above trend, government will take action to return the budget to surplus, by first allowing the level of tax receipts to recover naturally as the economy improves, while maintaining the government's commitment to keep taxation as a share of GDP below the 2007-2008 level on average.
And second, to hold real growth in spending to two per cent a year until the budget returns to surplus. These are important fundamental fiscal policy disciplines.
Of course the current collapse in government revenues caused by the global economic crisis, and the need temporarily stimulated the economy will have a temporary impact on government borrowing and debt.
But as the economy recovers, the government will use these future surpluses to repay these temporary borrowings. That is the responsible, prudent and cautious approach to public finance policy and national economic policy given the circumstances we now confront in the midst of a global economic recession.
I said also I've spent some time talking to you today about the government's strategy of global action, national action and local action to confront the crisis which the global financial implosion has presented us with.
When I attended recently the G20 Summit in London, what struck me as I sat with leaders from around the world was a common realisation of all sitting at the table that we were all in this together.
Whether it was the King of Saudi Arabia, the President of capitalist America or the President of communist China  -  all of us around the table not bigger than a few of these tables put together, each speaking with common purpose about a common challenge.
The good news out of London is that governments around that table concluded that they needed to craft a global economic strategy for global economic recovery.
Leaders around the table were enormously seized at what had happened with their predecessors when they met in London in 1933 at a similar conference. In 1933, leaders from so many economies around the world gathered in London in a major international conference to devise a strategy to chart the world out of what was then unfolding as the Global Depression.
The 1933 conference was a spectacular global failure. It was not just a failure of politics, it was a failure of economics, and the consequences there etched in black and white in the economic history texts.
Governments failed to coordinate their actions  -  governments instead resorted to unilateral national actions. They threw up the protectionist barriers around the world and as a consequence, what we saw in '29, '30, '31 and '32 continued, intensified and deepened through the 1930s, culminating in the catastrophic events of 1939.
The good news is that leaders of the G20, seized of that historical precedent, decided to act differently, and decided to act differently in five specific areas.
One  -  coordinated global economic stimulus. Here is a figure: the governments around the world representing those 20 significant economies concluded that they should act together to inject and invest $5 trillion into the global economy. The size of the global GDP is something in the order of $63 trillion. $5 trillion by way of investment by these economies, by these governments, represents a significant difference.
If you were to withdraw that, and if for example you can withdraw the effort currently being injected by the Chinese government in their own domestic stimulus programs there, the roll-on consequences for activity in all our economies would be acute and unemployment would be even higher.
Furthermore, all of those leaders gathered together in London realised the absolute premium attached to coordinated action. One government here, another government there deciding to stimulate their economies is one thing  -  acting together as a further multiplier effect of that on the back of combined monetary policy actions by the central banks across the world has had a significant stimulatory effect.
That's the first thing that global governments agreed upon.
The second is this, and it goes to the absolute heart of the financial crisis which we currently confront, and that is what is happening in terms of the overall health of the balance sheets of the world's leading private financial institutions  -  what is called in the professional literature ‘toxic asset management within the banks of the world', and that's principally the large funds which deliver the biggest slice of global capital funds.
Why is this of relevance to every businessman and woman in this room today? It goes to the heart of the continued delivery of private credit flows to our economy and to businesses within our economy, both large and small.
The fact that so many of our Australian banks have raised their capital from abroad in turn makes us entirely dependent on the health of the world's leading financial institutions.
The core of the problem is this  -  how do you restore the impaired assets, the toxic assets, currently lying on the balance sheets of a number of the world's leading financial institutions to health? And secondly, how do you recapitalise those banks back into normal credit flows? Because it is until that happens, we have a normal restoration of credit flows at reasonable quantity, availability and price, that will continue to be impeded in our overall trajectory of economic recovery.
That is why the Australian government, in partnership with the Brits and others, spent a lot of time going to that London summit preparing a draft international framework for toxic asset management for the major banks around the world.
The good news is the governments of the world signed and agreed on that common approach, and the application of it, both in the United States, the United Kingdom and other national jurisdictions is underway.
Some early signs of the restoration of normal levels of activity are beginning to emerge but there is a long way to go.
But absent coordinated action and policy resolve by governments gathered in London to do so in a coordinated, integrated fashion would I believe to cause all of us to end up just spinning our wheels, waiting for the restoration of normal credit flows.
Now we have a trajectory towards recovery, although the time will still be there for the taking before it has direct effect.
The third concrete action we agreed upon in London was this  -  something which hasn't been on the front page of the local newspaper here, or many newspapers anywhere, but is of fundamental and deep importance, and that is providing enough money, resources and power to the International Monetary Fund to deal with any other systemic financial shocks later this year.
Regrettably, the data emerging from the economies and financial systems in Central and Eastern Europe and other parts of the emerging economy world and the developing world are concerning.
What will be doubly concerning is if you had fundamental implosions in those financial systems is that an absence of resources on the part of the IMF and others to deal effectively and early on those problems as they emerge.
The alternative, absent proper resourcing and power on the part of the IMF, would be this  -  that the current exposure which the major European banks have to their Central and Eastern European counterparts and to the economies of those countries would cause a rebound effect back to the major European banks and onto the rest of the global financial system which would create a second round of toxic effect for the rest of the global economy including Australia.
Everything in the 21st century is connected to everything else, and therefore, us acting together, and Australia played its role, together with other governments, in crafting a reform strategy for the International Monetary Fund. A working group which Australia chaired in the leading up to the G20 summit, was to ensure that one, the IMF had the resources and two, the power and flexibility to act.
And once again, global leaders reached that agreement in London.
A fourth area of outcome  -  the rules governing the financial system. Those of you in this room who are either engaged in the financial services industry or who are customers of the financial services industry would all have different views as to what should be the proper balance of regulations for the future.
Guess what? We're not Robinson Crusoe  -  those debates have been had in every country, in every economy around the world and are being had between governments as well. The challenge is to get the balance right between what was an under-regulated environment in the past, to one which we don't wish to become over-regulated in the future. To preserve enough flexibility, opportunity and capacity for innovation of the financial services industry on the one hand while matching that with proper and prudent management of risk and exposure and systemic difficulty on the other.
What we did in London was agreed on principles to do that and commissioned an expert global body - the Financial Stability Forum, which Australia is on - to craft those new regulations for the financial system for the future.
To get the balance right on future prudential standards, to get the balance right on executive remuneration within the financial services sector so that risk is properly calibrated with reward.
And to get the balance right more broadly on how the financial services sector operates in the future globally, because confidence cannot be fully restored in our economy or anyone else's until the economy and the country and the people at large believe that the rules of the financial system are right for the future.
Finally, an outcome from London was this  -  we agreed in London that governments of the world learned from the lessons of the 1930s and draw a line underneath an outbreak of the rampant protectionism that we have seen in earlier decades.
Protectionism, let off the leash, has a capacity to completely throttle, destroy, strangle and suffocate economic recovery.
We cannot allow that to happen.
In the 1930s that's precisely what they did allow to happen. The good news from London is that through the resolve of that communiqué, building on the resolution we achieved in Washington only four months before, that we resolved as governments leading the economies representing 85 per cent of GDP that any further protectionist measures inconsistent with our WTO obligations would not be contemplated, considered or implemented by any participating governments.
Whether there are going to breaches at the margin of that undertaking, well, time will tell. But what I do know, is that in the absence of that declaration, the absence of that concerted effort and decisions to enable the World Trade Organisation and others to monitor compliance efforts between now and when we next meet as the G20 Summit, this is an enormous step in right direction compared with what the alternative would be. Protectionism would throttle the global economic recovery, it would certainly throttle economic prospects in a great state like Western Australia as well which is so export-led.
My purpose in making these remarks to you about the global course of action is simply to underline that your Government, the Australian Government, has been into this big time with our partners from around the world. Often in ways which are invisible to the domestic debate and policy debate in Australia and understandably so.
But it rests ultimately on an unassailable piece of logic, that unless we are in there with the rest of the world helping to craft a pathway to global economic recovery, our national and locals actions will not add up to a lot, which is why we've been doing it.
As to our national efforts - and I will not speak long on this as you're more familiar with it- but the decisions we took last October to underpin stability in the Australian financial system were fundamental to the continued wellbeing of the Australian economy. Those of you in the financial services sector will understand full well what a near-run thing the events of last October were.
The events following Lehmanns and the implosions on Wall Street and the extraordinary events of September and October last year, had we not in that critical weekend in October acted to provide Government guarantees for the deposits of Australian bank deposits, building societies and credit unions, as well as provide a guarantee for our banks for their inter-bank lending in order to secure their external lines of credit, there would have been a fundamentally different scenario that would have unfolded for Australia following that critical weekend.
No Australian Government in the history of Federation has ever been asked to make either of those decisions. It was a sobering moment. Had we not made those decisions the consequences for the real economy and for the businesses represented in this room, I believe, would have been catastrophic.
The second arm of our national action has been this. Consistent with what I said before, given the contraction that is occurring in the private economy, the Australian Government has stepped up to the plate and engaged in a conscious, deliberate national economic stimulus strategy.
That is why we have invested in providing support for the one and half million Australians who work in the retail sector through the support we have provided through the payments to pensioners, carers, veterans and families. That is why we have stepped up to the plate by investing in the largest school modernisation program the country has ever seen. We are injecting some $15 billion, the equivalent of 1.5 per cent of GDP in creating a state of the art 21st century school across the country.
And our objective is this, is to turn every single primary school in this country into a construction site. Some may object to that for noise reasons. I don't object to it for economic reasons because what we're on about is providing opportunities for sparkies, electricians and tradies and everyone else down to the local level in order to provide jobs now to build the infrastructure we need for tomorrow and so too large scale investments in social housing, large scale investments in energy efficiency, large scale investments in our nation building and jobs plan which had this as its fundamental rationale: getting activity in the economy now, some $30 billion worth of direct investment and on top of that creating the infrastructure we need for tomorrow. That's it in a nutshell.
And beyond that as well, longer term infrastructure of the type which is alive in our announcement of the national broadband network and creating an information superhighway for the 21st century. This will be a project with investments in it of up to $43 billion. This is not a pipe dream. We will start rolling out this network as of July in Tasmania. Jobs now. Economic opportunities now. Creating infrastructure for businesses of the future as well.
Global action, national action but beyond that again local action. One of the reasons I've come to Perth in these last few days has been to spend time with local communities as I did around Fremantle and the City of Cockburn yesterday, speaking to a local jobs forum. Because the human face of all that I've been describing is when people lose their jobs through no fault of their own and their families are put at risk and as a consequence their communities suffer as well. How do we support them? How do we do it right? How do we do it better than we've done in the past? How do we engage the great talents of business and others operating at the local level to make a real difference to people's lives?
It's not just providing additional resources to those who are dealing with genuine hardship cases  -  what St Vincent de Paul do, what the Salvation Army do, what other charities do with emergency payments. That is fundamental, that is necessary, and that needs to be supported as well, particularly at a time when so many of these charities are already under stress because of the contraction of the corporate sponsorship dollar and we the Government are stepping up to the plate on that.
But the other challenge is this. In areas of intensified local unemployment as a consequence of this recession, how do we act effectively from the ground up in local communities through effective partnership with local chambers of commerce, with local unions, with local government and with local church, charitable and community organisations and so forth to make a difference.
The purpose of the local jobs forum that I addressed in the City of Cockburn yesterday which had several hundred local people representing all of the sectors I've just described, was how do we tap into their talent and enthusiasm and ability and ideas on the one hand and how to coordinate that with the levels of stimulus that we the national government are providing as well as what we are doing by way of additional training programs being offered nationally as well.
As I said to that community of Cockburn and I say this to all of you represented here today, this will work on the basis of enthusiasm from the ground up. It will work on the basis of good ideas generated from the community up. It's not for me to mandate from the vast and distant shores of Lake Burley Griffin as to what the solutions the City of Cockburn should be because inevitably we will get it wrong.
What I do know, however, is that local enterprise, local small business working in partnership with local government and the local community sector can come up with some powerful ideas and to make that additional capacity, we have created a $650 million local jobs fund to be, to support the efforts of our priority employment coordinators in each of these priority areas and that's a challenge here as well.
Global action, national action, local action. We put these things together and we've got a powerful opportunity not just to see Australia through this global economic recession but to actually do it infinitely better than would otherwise have been imagined. And that depends on us all putting our shoulders to the wheel against the realisation that we are all in this together.
For Western Australia and I'll conclude on this and I understand I will take some questions. Each of the investments I have described actually hits the ground here in the West as well. For example the Nation Building and Jobs Plan I referred to before - $1.8 billion worth of direct investment from the Australian Government coming here in the months ahead, which would otherwise not be the case.
Similarly it applies to each of the other elements of the stimulus strategy that I've referred to as well. Each and every one of the training programs I referred to as well. Each and every one of the local government infrastructure projects I referred to as well and the fact that our trebling the first home owners boost is out there supporting the residential housing sector in this state as well.
What I have described nationally is hitting the ground here in the West as well and it is important that it does, because my mission as Prime Minister of Australia is to make a difference on the ground here, in every suburb, in every community and in every town and in every city that is bearing the brunt of something which they did not cause; this global economic recession.
So in the weeks and months ahead what we'll be doing is monitoring closely how we are delivering each of those projects on the ground here and we'll be doing so in partnership with the WA Government, we'll be backing large projects here in Western Australia, as we've already done via our investment in the Ord.
Within not a long time of taking office, proposals came to me from the WA Government about what we could do to invest together in the Ord. My response was let's go and have a look to see if it stacks up and hop into it. And we did and we are. Within a few short months you'll have a $195 million investment for us to go partners with the WA State Government on how we can make this work.
Regard that as a template of how we intend to do business with the rest of the State. Our job is to make a difference and we intend to so in partnership with all of you here.
Lastly if I could comment on confidence and I'd like to conclude by reflecting on the comments also made by the Governor of the Reserve Bank in his remarks yesterday.
The financial year ahead is obviously a difficult one, it is going to be tough for businesses and tough for people seeking to hold on to their jobs. But let us focus also on the fact that our glass is more than half full. Let us not become preoccupied with focusing on the glass being half empty.
When we realise the collective strengths we have as an economy, when we realise the great strengths that you have here in the Western Australiam economy, let us be confident about how we can see this national economy and State economy through this crisis. And the fresh and new opportunities which it will generate.
We believe there are strong grounds for confidence in Australia's economic future and again I underline what the Governor said yesterday and I quote him: “Australia's genuine long-term economic prospects remain good, and there remain good grounds to think that we will continue to weather the storm better than most.”
The Governor then went on to make reference to six reasons as to why in this global recession Australia still offers a more attractive proposition to international capital than most other nations. First he said, and we take this for granted, we enjoy an assured political stability. And I would remind those in this room that that is not necessarily the case in many countries and many economies where this global recession does its work and (inaudible).
Second, the Government is free of the difficult governance and exit strategy matters that will arise in other nations that have given direct financial support to banks or taken ownership stakes. Let us remind ourselves of the fact that worldwide today there are eleven remaining double A class rated banks, four of those banks worldwide are Australian banks. Five of them are Canadian and it doesn't leave many besides.
This is a powerful selling point as you track around the world and I sat down with the executive of the New York Stock Exchange for lunch recently in New York and with a number of major listed companies represented. That fundamental fact together with our prudent approach to public financial management speaks volumes in terms of the global economy's confidence in what we are doing here in Australia.
Third, our public finances remain in very sound shape, with modest debt levels and a medium-term path for the budget back towards balance. Fourth, we have sensible macroeconomic and microeconomic policy frameworks. Fifth, we remain open for trade and investment. Sixth, we enjoy strong links with the Asian region, which enjoys the most dynamic growth potential in the world.
These are the six strengths referred to by the Governor in his remarks yesterday. He is right to refer to those strengths, they are enduring and fundamental strengths of this economy.
As we go forward - you in the West, ourselves nationally - let us be mindful therefore of this glass being more than half full. Let us also be mindful that the Government which you have elected nationally is engaged in economic stimulus strategy and a wider economic strategy to charter a course for Australia through this economic crisis.
We are resolved so to do that, we look forward to doing so in partnership with you, the women and men of the business community of Western Australia and your colleagues around the nation. I thank you for your attention.


PM: Today our thoughts are with the Pratt family at this difficult time.
Dick Pratt is a great supporter of the General Sir John Monash Foundation and it's just one example of his generosity in helping younger generations fulfil their potential.
I would also like to acknowledge today the presence of Dame Elisabeth Murdoch  -  another great supporter of programs to help young people develop their talents, including through the Monash Foundation.
Can I further acknowledge the great work of the Australia-Israel Chamber of Commerce in hosting today's function, in supporting the relationship between Australia and Israel, and enabling me to confirm again publicly before you all what I have said throughout my political career, that I am a lifelong friend of the state of Israel.
On the question of Israel, Australia has made absolutely clear its determination not to participate in the Durban Review Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance in Geneva.
The Durban Review Conference should have been an occasion for the world to unite against racism in all its forms. Australia has worked with a range of countries in Geneva in weeks leading up to the conference, promoting an acceptable outcome document from the review conference.
Regrettably it became clear that that was not the resolve of other states participating in the Geneva conference. Some other states. And instead, the conference was heading in the reverse direction.
Australia cannot support and will not support a document which reaffirms the 2001 Durban Declaration and Program of Action. That 2001 declaration singled out Israel.
Inflammatory remarks of President Ahmadinejad of Iran at the conference are unacceptable and underline the Australian Government's decision not to attend the Durban Conference.
The Australian Government condemns the continued campaign of anti-Semitism on behalf of the Government of Iran.
Today, ladies and gentlemen, we gather to honour a great Australian.
Today we honour arguably the greatest Australian.
And it is good that we honour a man who never held political office but who across the generations has inspired the nation.
General Sir John Monash was a man whose view of the world still holds true today.
His values, his passion for education, his passion for excellence, his passion for nation building.
And in doing so, he brought to bear the great qualities of his Jewish heritage  -  qualities that across generations have helped build the Australian nation.
Every Anzac Day, the nation pauses to reflect on the Anzac spirit  -  -  on the courage of the men who faced the most terrible odds at Gallipoli.
But Gallipoli was only part of the Australian battle experience during the Great War.
The heroism of Australian troops in France and the killing fields of Flanders are of equal part and equal measure in the proud military history of the Australian nation.
Monash was a Renaissance man of commanding intellect, an engineer by training who could discuss the intricacies of a Beethoven symphony in as much detail as he could describe Napoleon's battle strategy at Austerlitz.
In fact, he saw the two as close analogies.
He described a modern battle plan as “a score for an orchestral composition” where every instrument had to play its part.
Monash was also an innovator.
As the historian Michael McKernan observed:
“When we think about war, we think about ordinary blokes doing extraordinary things. We don't think about leadership. We don't think about creativity. We don't think about genius yet Monash was all that and more.”
John Monash's approach to the repatriation of some 160,000 Australian troops in the first nine months after the First World War ended was a show of determined pragmatism alongside the genuine care for the wellbeing of his men.
And it was underscored by his lifelong belief in the power of education.
The AIF Education Scheme was possibly one of his greatest achievements.
In it, Monash stressed the need to elevate the troops' dedication to co-operative citizenship and national aims.
Troops took to the scheme with alacrity and returned home to Australia with new knowledge, and a purpose and a plan for life.
We have with us today Katherine Daniell who received a Monash Award in 2005.
Katherine's great grandfather served under Monash.
In a letter home to his parents on September 19, 1918, Edward, her grandfather, described Monash as a grand fellow.
He saw Monash as less a professional soldier and more a shrewd, keen, compassionate engineer who realised how men should be treated.
To quote her grandfather and with Katherine's blessing, here is the letter:
“So if we are out for the winter resting, his idea [that's Monash's idea] is not to drill and drill and drill us again; no  -  he says, give men an education, give them a fresh outlook and they will be keener soldiers.”
There is great wisdom in Monash's leadership and I believe this to be a reflection of true leadership.
The General Sir John Monash Awards, and the extraordinary young Australians who have won them in the past, are helping to keep the name and legacy of Monash and his men alive.
These uniquely Australian awards are a great boost to some of our best and our brightest.
Katie, Rebecca, Tim  -  I congratulate you on your 2009 awards and know you will do the memory of General Sir John Monash proud.
You are part of an alumni that we hope will provide leaders for the nation for the coming decades.
You have been chosen because you are widely involved in contributing to many cultural, sporting and community spheres of Australian life as well.
Each one of you has passion, has energy, has vision, and the desire to work with others to change lives for the better.
That's why I am announcing today that the Australian Government is committing $720,000 to this Foundation.
This will provide four of Australia's brightest and best young people with the opportunity to study at any one of the world's best universities for three years starting in 2010.
This will enable the Foundation to offer a total of eight awards next year.
These are prestigious, national scholarships for our brightest and our best, and we should as a nation be proud of them.
But there is a catch  -  each person who we honour with such a scholarship, we also expect to contribute mightily to the nation. No pressure to those of you in the room. We'll be watching. We'll be monitoring. We'll be measuring.
Monash would have expected nothing less. With you, we support, we encourage and we nurture and expect the highest contribution back to the nation.
I encourage you all to support the General Sir John Monash Foundation because in doing so you are supporting the leaders of tomorrow.
Developing the talents of the younger generations is a task for the whole community.
When we think back to the war in which Monash led, we can only wonder how many future Prime Ministers, doctors, lawyers, writers, Nobel Prize-winning scientists, architects, teachers, sportsmen, who were cut down in their prime  -  a war that left more than 61,000 of our fellow Australians dead.
When I sit in the MCG I often reflect on that great stadium full at capacity  -  100,000 souls gathered. 100,000. The same number of all Australians who have made the sacrifice, the supreme sacrifice in all wars. A haunting thought.
Lest we forget.
Ladies and gentlemen, we confront challenges of a different type today. Those of the world economic recession.
And some of the virtues and values that Australians have demonstrated in times of great duress in the past will be called forth again.
The International Monetary Fund has reminded us in recent days that we confront now the worst global recession since the Great Depression three-quarters of a century ago.
These are stark and difficult times. We must face up to the fact that this is the reality that all countries, all economies face now.
The challenge for us all is what strategy we shall embrace in dealing with it. And to chart a strategy to see not just Australia through, but to see the global economy through as well.
What this Australian Government is doing is engaging in the actions  -  globally, nationally and locally  -  to make a difference - in order to provide for us a basis for optimism, hope and confidence to see Australia through.
There is no point in simply sitting down and doing nothing. There is no point in simply sitting down and saying there is nothing to be done. There is every point in galvanising the energies and intelligence and resources of the nation to make a difference.
I cannot stand before you as Prime Minister of Australia and say I can stop a global economic recession from washing over this nation's shores.
What I can tell you as Prime Minister of Australia is that we can act globally, nationally and locally to reduce the impact of that recession. To cushion the impact of that recession, in order to save as many jobs as possible and for those who lose their jobs, to provide training opportunities for the future, when the economy recovers and their skills will once again (inaudible) by businesses in full recovery mode.
That is the strategy upon which we are embarked. A strategy which seeks to provide as many jobs and training opportunities now, and through that also, building the infrastructure we need for tomorrow.
Our global action is as follows. Recently you saw that I attended the G20 in London. A gathering of the heads of government from the 20 largest economies in the world.
History weighed heavily on our minds. As some of you who attended a function I addressed at the Exhibition Building here in Melbourne last night at the Committee For Melbourne, I said in London as did many of my colleagues, that when global leaders gathered last in London for a conference of such significance, was in 1933.
66 nations from around the world gathered in London on that occasion to fashion their response to the global Depression. They failed.
That conference erupted in acrimony, and as a result protectionist measures adopted by each nation's state, one against the other, compounded the length, severity and debt of what was then the unfolding of the Global Depression throughout the 1930s, culminating in the catastrophic events of 1939.
The resolve in London was to learn from history and to act in a different direction. And what we did in London was five key things.
One, agree on a program of global economic stimulus. $5 trillion worth of investment in the global economy, an economy which equals $63 trillion in total global GDP each year. A significant difference in terms of the number of jobs that we save through our activities as opposed to being lost.
Second, we agreed on an international framework of toxic asset management in the world's most significant private financial institutions. The truth is, as so many of you know in this room here tonight, is that until we see a restoration of normal private credit flows in the global economy, we are simply providing stimulus in the interim for that recovery in the private economy, through private credit flows to occur.
But until toxic assets or impaired assets are effectively dealt with by the world's largest banks and those banks are in turn recapitalised, then our recovery will be delayed.
What was agreed in London was an international framework for doing that. And for the fruits of that endeavour, and the separate and related actions by national governments in the United States, the United Kingdom and elsewhere, to restore their banks to health is beginning to show signs of effect and recovery.
The third thing we agreed in London is this. To resource and empower the International Monetary Fund to act in the event of significant implosions in the economies of Central and Eastern Europe and other parts of the emerging economic world and the developing economy.
The reason for that is that absent the IMF's ability to step into the breach, with sufficient resources and sufficient policy flexibility so to do, the possibility of those economies in turn to default, and or the implosion of individual significant financial institutions in Central and Eastern Europe, reverberate back on the major banks of Europe and the rest of the world, and create a second round effect across the global economy, is indeed significant.
Therefore, for markets to have confidence that the global community is prepared to act early, decisively and effectively through the International Monetary Fund required us to act.
And we did in London. Agreement was reached on providing the IMF with $1 trillion worth of resources and the policy flexibility to intervene should that become necessary.
Australia, in this and on the earlier matter I mentioned concerning toxic assets management, was active in fashioning the (inaudible) report to the G20 London Summit meetings for other to agree.
Fourth, we agreed that we would establish new rules in the global financial system, to get the balance right between regulation and creativity, enterprise and innovation. And we've empowered the Financial Stability Forum, now the Financial Stability Board made up of the central bankers of the G20 economies and those which advise them, to fashion those rules for our subsequent agreement at the upcoming Summit which will be held later this year.
Five and most critically, the leaders of the world, mindful acutely of the lessons from the 1930s drew a line against protectionism. What we did in London was agree that we would take no national protectionist measures inconsistent with our obligations under the World Trade Organisation and we would extend that commitment out for further eighteen months.
This is necessary, coordinated, global action to prevent an outbreak of protectionism which would compound the global recession and delay the global economic recovery.
So my message to you here today in Melbourne is that these actions taken globally in which your government of Australia is an active and direct participant through the G20 Summit in London provided one of the key building blocks to chart a pathway to economic recovery for the nation and for the world.
Secondly I just referred to national action. The actions that we have taken last October to stabilise Australian financial markets have been fundamental to ensure the continued viable operation of the Australian economy and the continued flow of credit.
Our decision taken on October 12 last year in a difficult and dark weekend for many to provide a government sovereign guarantee for deposits in Australian deposit taking institutions and to provide a further sovereign guarantee for inter-bank lending in Australian financial institutions was fundamental to maintaining stability and confidence in the Australian financial system.
Had we not done so I fear what the consequences would have been. This is the first time in the history of the Commonwealth that any Australian Government has had to act in this direction. We did so and did so without apology. It was necessary to maintain confidence.
I report to you today that of the eleven remaining double A plus rated banks in the world today, four of them are Australian. Five are them are Canadian and that doesn't leave many besides. The stability of our own financial markets has been fundamental to the Government's strategy to chart Australia through this difficult period of recession.
That is one part of our national strategy, the other part is this: how do we act effectively to inject stimulus, growth and confidence into the economy while the private sector is in retreat. We have acted early, decisively and effectively by implementing an unapologetic national economic stimulus strategy to act in a counter-cyclical fashion against the retreat in activity evidenced in the private sector. It's the right and normal thing to do. Governments around the world are doing this as well. Governments represented by the G20 are doing it as well.
When you look at that figure of five trillion dollars being injected into the global economy, it's because all of us are acting in the same direction to provide additional support for jobs, activity and growth at a time of national economic duress.
For us we have invested unapologetically in providing stimulus through payments to pensioners and carers and veterans and to other families because we are entirely mindful that one and a half million Australians are out there working in the retail sector. (inaudible) and trust, the figure for Australian retail sales for the end of last year and early this year compared to what has occurred in many other developed economies.
Secondly we've invested also in medium term stimulus with the largest single school modernisation program this country has ever seen. $15 billion worth of investment turning every primary school in the country into a construction site. Rolling that out early and fast to provide activity for tradies, for apprentices, for those working as electricians and plumbers in order to make a difference.
Also, long term infrastructure. Our decision to invest up to $43 billion in partnership with the private sector in a national broadband network. The purpose in all these things is as follows: to provide jobs and opportunities now as well as building the infrastructure we need for tomorrow. That's the idea, that's the strategy, that's what we're doing.
If you were to aggregate these measures in terms of the impact on this economy in Victoria as I said to the gathering at the exhibition building last night, our aggregate investment through economic stimulus is putting into this Victorian economy an additional $8.3 billion now. That is the equivalent of three percent of gross state product in this economy.
These are not nominal measures, these are not rhetorical measures, these are real measures and they are flowing out into the real economy because we take our responsibility deeply and profoundly, in this environment, in this virtually unprecedented environment, to make a difference on the ground.
Finally, we cannot allow this global economic recession to distract us from long term challenges as well, dealing with how we roll out the infrastructure we need for the twenty-first century, hence high speed broadband.
Rolling out our program for the education revolution so that we have the best educated, best trained, best skilled workforce for the twenty-first century. Rolling out our long term reform program for health and hospitals. Rolling out that long term reform program for acting decisively and effectively and intelligently on climate change.
Our reform program also for closing the gap with Indigenous Australians and also the long term challenge which is how do we prepare the nation for its defence and security needs for the twenty-first century as well.
As we prepare for the security challenge of the twenty-first century, the Government in recent days has been engaged in the finalisation of the Defence White Paper for the future. The first responsibility of any Government is to provide for the national security of Australia, but for this Australian Government there is no higher priority than the national security of our country.
Last December I announced the first National Security Statement to the parliament of Australia which for the first time sought to integrate the range of threats we face, the range of assets we must deploy in response to those threats.
I also announced for the first time the appointment of Australia's first national security adviser, to integrate all dimensions of national security policy from cyber security, counter-terrorism, border protection, entity security to classical defence.
The truth is our national security assets are [inaudible] increasingly integrated strategy and each of our agencies is responding well to the challenge. Our defence force lies at the heart of our national security framework, that is why we have invested a great deal of time and effort in developing the 2009 Defence White Paper that will be released soon.
The delivery of a White Paper at this time is acutely challenging as we work to defend ourselves from the global economic storm. It is the most difficult environment to frame the Australian budget in modern economic history. It is also the most difficult environment to frame our long term defence planning in modern economic history as well.
Nevertheless the Government will not resile even in the difficult times from the requirement for long term coherence of our defence planning for the long term security of our nation. This is core business for government. That is why we have forged ahead in our preparation of the Defence White Paper because national security needs do not disappear because of the global recession. If anything those needs become more acute.
The Government's ambition is to develop a far-reaching and comprehensive plan that will deliver an effective defence force for the next twenty to thirty years.
Much has happened since the last White Paper in 2000. In order to meet the new challenges of the 21st century, a new White Paper is essential. The security environment is less certain, more dynamic and requires us to prepare for a greater range of contingencies.
Since the last White Paper we have seen the growth of transnational terrorism and its effects in New York, London, Madrid, Bali, Jakarta and Mumbai. The list is far too long. We need to ensure that Afghanistan does not once again become a safe haven for terrorists, and that Pakistan remains a stable democratic state and does not itself become a safe haven for terrorists.
We have seen the global rise of illegal immigration because of a range of global security and economic factors: from instability in the Middle East, the continuing war in Afghanistan and civil strife in Sri Lanka.
We have seen changes in the distribution of global power  -  in particular the rise of China and India in economic influence, political influence, foreign policy influence and strategic influence in the Asia-Pacific region, across the Pacific and Indian Oceans. We have seen the growing nuclear ambitions of states such as North Korea and Iran  -  ambitions that introduce an increased level of risk within our own region.
There is also the wider risk of continued weapons of mass destruction proliferation in general and nuclear weapons proliferation in particular. Stability in our immediate neighbourhood also requires our ongoing attention on the political, economic and environmental fragility of micro-states.
There are also growing threats of cyber-security and cyber-warfare confronting Australia and our allies. Furthermore, we are witnessing the still unfolding impact of the global financial crisis  -  its influence on the region  -  in terms of economic, social, political and military stability  -  and will bear watching closely.
So it is in this context that we need to examine what our future strategic environment will look like, what kind of forces we will need to operate within it and we face a range of future challenges which must be dealt with. Terrorism will continue to remain a threat well into the future  -  terrorists will seek to do us harm and employ whatever means at their disposal and therefore create a real challenge for our intelligence, police and allied security assets, all of whom must remain vigilant and properly resourced.
Border protection will demand the effective deployment of whole-of-government assets  -  including military assets  -  to meet this evolving global threat. Conventional military capabilities will become more sophisticated as the Asia-Pacific region becomes more prosperous  -  weapons and platforms will be more effective.
The potential proliferation of WMD and ballistic missile technology is a threat to us, our region, and our allies. New kinds of threats, such as cyber and space-based threats, are likely to become more prevalent  -  changing the way we need to think about preparing and protecting our forces.
Increasing security risks associated with climate change, resource security and energy security are likely to exacerbate existing problems in developing states. Many countries in our immediate region will be especially vulnerable to rising sea levels, droughts and reduced access to food and energy. Natural disasters, compounded in some cases by the impact of climate change, also pose an increasing demand on our defence and wider national security assets.
Intra-state conflict will be an enduring feature of the future strategic environment  -  we will need to be prepared to operate in a whole-of-government context to integrate our security objectives with a broader political strategy. And we of course can never discount, never discount the possibility of major wars between states. And all of these trends of course occur, and will intersect, in an increasingly interconnected world.
The advantages of globalisation and instant communication will also provide great benefit but also produce additional risks. Events on one side of the world are not self-contained  -  oftentimes their impact and influence is immediate and far-reaching. And the convergence of multiple trends  -  such as population movements, demographic change, global public health risks and environmental pressures  -  will further complicate our future security environment.
Consequently the Australian Defence Force and our wider national security assets and agencies will be required to undertake a diverse range of tasks in a complex environment where the only certainty is change.
But in executing all these tasks, Australia will remain anchored in our alliance with the United States  -  an alliance forged during the last World War, under President Roosevelt and Prime Minister Curtin; an alliance that has prospered under 13 US Presidents and 13 Australian Prime Ministers, Republican and Democrat, Labor and Liberal. An alliance that will continue as the bedrock of Australia's national security for the future.
Ladies and gentlemen, these are the challenges we face. They are hard challenges, they are difficult challenges but these are challenges to which the Government will rise in its response to the Australian Defence White Paper and articulate our detailed strategic response to it.
We'll be faced with challenges concerning the remediation of our existing defence assets, plugging the gap which already exists in the defence force that we've inherited from our predecessors as well as building the defence force we need for 2030. That's the challenge which lies ahead of us, a difficult challenge but one which is necessary to provide fundamentally the long term security of this nation.
Of course the strategic environment we face will not be static. Every five years we propose to review and refine the assessments in the 2009 White Paper and make any necessary changes to the force structure. But what we have in the 2009 Defence White Paper provides a long-term plan for Defence capability and capacity to promote a secure Australia. It's the right thing to do. It's the necessary thing to do. We must never allow our defence forces to be ill-prepared for the challenges that lie ahead.
Monash had to lead a virtually entirely volunteer force with limited basic training. They nonetheless acquitted themselves magnificently in the field. Our troops made the difference and Monash's leadership made the difference as well. Through proper planning, and detailed preparation, Monash and the Australian Army Corps made a difference. They made a decisive difference. Through the great battles at Amiens in 1918, and later in breaking through the Hindenburg line, Monash's impact was in fact decisive.
Sir John Monash was instrumental in the success of the allied war effort in France. The Australian Defence Force continues this proud record in all theatres of war today. Our soldiers are respected for their courage and their skills and rightly so. There is no higher calling in this nation than to wear the uniform of Australia. And we the Government of Australia owe it to them and future generations to have the very best Defence Force we can to protect our national interest and safeguard our national security for the future.
I thank you.
[ends] 


This is an important day for the nation. It's an important day for families. It's an important day for women. It's an important day for kids. It's an important day for men.
Because we are dealing with a great affliction on the nation. And that is violence. And we're here to do something about it.
I'm pleased to be here this morning to receive the ‘Time for Action' report from the National Council to Reduce Violence against Women and their Children.
This is a tough, but vitally important subject for our whole community  -  for women, for children, and most particularly for men.
And it's a subject on which we must end the silence. End it. Because for too long, silence has been seen as a form of tolerance. And our national resolve must be zero tolerance. Zero tolerance when it comes to violence against women and violence against children.
As the report highlights, the facts are profoundly disturbing.
Nearly one in three Australian women experiences physical violence  -  and nearly one in five experiences sexual violence  -  during the course of their lifetime.
This translates to physical violence against approximately 350,000 women and sexual assaults of 126,000 women every year. These are unacceptable figures for Australians. They are unacceptable figures for any civilised community. They are unacceptable figures for this Australian Government.
The physical, social, emotional and psychological effects on so many women are incalculable.
And the damage done to children growing up in homes where there is violence or the threat of violence is likewise incalculable.
The experience of seeing mum attacked or threatened with violence can leave scars on children that remain for many, many years beyond childhood.
For some, those scars never heal.
Beyond the profound and terrible effects on women and children, there is also an extraordinary economic cost.
Research commissioned by the National Council shows that violence against women costs the nation $13.6 billion a year.
The research also shows that if we do nothing, things will get worse.
By 2021, the research predicts each year an estimated three quarters of a million Australian women will be victims of violence  -  at a cost of $15.6 billion.
In politics, many things are complicated. This one is not. It's simple. It's as simple as this:
One women who experiences violence is one too many. One child who experiences or witnesses violence is one too many.
One person who thinks it's okay to assault a woman is one too many. One witness who turns a blind eye to such violence is one too many.
One woman turned away when she asks for help is one too many. And one perpetrator who is not held accountable for his violence is one too many.
We cannot allow the silence to continue.
That is why before we came to office we made the commitment that we would lead the development of a national approach to reducing wide violence against women and children. And we intend to honour that commitment.
It is why we established the National Council to Reduce Violence against Women and their Children, under the leadership of Libby Lloyd, to advise the Government on a plan for the future.
The Council conducted significant research to assess the existing evidence, the operation of legal systems and the economic cost of violence against women.
The Council consulted more than 2,000 Australians.
Time for Action, the name of the report, contains the Council's recommendations for a National Plan to Reduce Violence against Women.
And from today the Government moves to the next stage in the development of the National Plan.
One of the clear messages of the National Council's report is that all governments across Australia need to get our act together in how we respond to violence against women and children.
Responsibility for services relevant to women is spread widely across government agencies and across Commonwealth, State and Territory jurisdictions.
As a result, it's hard to get a coordinated government effort that could help to make real progress.
That's about to change. As Prime Minister, I'm determined to lead that change.
As I said before I came to office, it's time to end the blame game between different levels of government and actually get governments working together.
It's easy to blame someone else. It is so easy to blame a different level of government. But you know something, the Australian people are absolutely fed up with to the back teeth with that approach. They just want it to work. They just want the system to deliver. They want results. They want things to change.
And I believe they will back a plan which offers that real prospect and possibility.
The Government is committed to providing national leadership in reducing violence.
Many of the Council's recommendations require joint effort by the Commonwealth, State and Territory Governments and the community more broadly.
That's why the Government will take Time for Action to the Council of Australian Governments.
We will work with the State and Territory Governments to develop the National Plan to Reduce Violence against Women for release in 2010.
We will also act immediately to jumpstart a number practical and substantive initiatives identified in the report as urgent priorities.
Today I can confirm that the Government will invest $42 million on a package of new measures in services, education, community awareness and in the law.
First, we will establish a new national online and 1800 service to provide professional assessment, referral and counselling for victims of violence and their families, at a cost of $12.5 million over four years.
The current Domestic Violence and Sexual Assault Helpline provides only basic advice and referral services.
The new phone line will build on existing services to provide 24 hours a day/ 7 days a week assistance accessible from any place in Australia.
The new service will also offer counselling through an online forum  -  an important addition for those in rural and remote areas.
The new service will provide appropriately qualified, specialised domestic violence and sexual assault counsellors to assess and address problems directly with victims and their families.
It will also provide backup support to workers dealing with critical incidents and who are isolated from professional supervision. This extra support will help to ensure that their own health and wellbeing is also protected.
Second, the Government will invest $26 million for primary prevention activities to focus on changing attitudes and behaviours that contribute to violence.
This will include $9 million to improve the quality and uptake of Respectful Relationships programs for school age young people and $17 million for a national campaign focused on men and boys.
As I've said before, it is our gender, it is my gender, it is the male gender, that is responsible for this violence against women and children. Therefore, the responsibility to act lies with us.
During this year we will test best practice in Respectful Relationships and promising new programs across 31 school and non-school sites nationally.
It is critical that all people, particularly young people, develop the skills to maintain respectful relationships.
Respectful Relationships programs will be implemented mostly in mainstream school settings and will reach up to 8,000 young people over a period of five years.
Programs will also be implemented in non-school settings and will target vulnerable young people including those with intellectual disability, young people who have left school and young people living in remote communities.
These include:
     * 15 Northern Territory schools;
     * Nine schools and non-school sites in Victoria, Tasmania, and New South Wales, focused on groups of young people who are particularly vulnerable to violence;
     * Four schools also in the ACT  -  including Narrabundah College;
     * Three remote schools in the Kimberley in WA; and
     * A pre-elite youth sporting squad for Queensland.
In the three Kimberley schools - at Fitzroy Crossing, Halls Creek and Oombulgarri - the Federal and Western Australian Governments will work closely with the local communities to remodel an existing Respectful Relationships program to suit the needs of those communities.
These programs will seek to build the skills of local communities, of men and women - not just relying on school teachers  -  to assist in providing this education.
We will test these three programs in other remote communities to establish their influence on young people's attitudes and behaviours.
We are also very pleased that the NRL has become a partner in the Respectful Relationships program  -  in particular, that they have identified pre-elite under 16s and pre-under 18s for the program.
The NRL will identify ex-players and other important role models in the Code to be trained as educators.
We commend the NRL for taking this opportunity to work with young players and to influence their thinking and behaviour about relationships and respect.
We will also evaluate the South Australian model, Keeping Safe, the most far-reaching Respectful Relationships approach currently being delivered in any state education system.
We will also develop a comprehensive social marketing campaign to change community attitudes and behaviours  -  with an investment of $17 million over four years.
The campaign will target young men and engage them to help us prevent violence against women.
These activities will provide an alternative way forward for young people who are growing up in and around violence and abuse.
The whole point here is that people can look to role models to inspire them to live their life free of violence.
We have to make sure that the mistakes of the past are not, are not repeated in the future.
That's why Respectful Relationships education will play such an important role in reducing violence against women.
Third, we will drive research and innovation to inform Australian approaches to violence against women, at a cost and an investment of $3 million over four years.
This research will particularly focus on evaluating best practice in the treatment of perpetrators of violence.
Libby said before, and I say again, the Government is interested and committed to evidence-based policy.
We are interested in one single thing  -  what works, what changes these behaviours, what brings about a measurable reduction in the statistical data on violence against women and children. That's why research is of such continuing importance.
Fourth, we will support a small expert advisory group to advise the Government on the National Plan.
And fifth, we will implement a series of detailed measures within the legal system to ensure perpetrators are held to account and victims have access to the justice they deserve.
At the recent meeting of the Standing Committee of Attorneys-
General, the Commonwealth Attorney-General, Robert McClelland, sought agreement for a working group to develop a national registration scheme for domestic and family violence orders.
The current system requires victims of violence to take steps to register violence orders when moving from one state to another, placing the onus on the vulnerable at a time when they are in need of protection.
The Government is working with the States and Territories to establish a scheme whereby the registration of domestic and family violence orders occurs automatically.
The Standing Committee also agreed to an unprecedented examination of the interaction of Federal, State and Territory laws relating to the safety of women and their children, in particular to examine where the interaction between these laws increases the risks to women and children.
And the Australian Law Reform Commission will conduct this examination working with law reform commissioners across Australia. And I would commend the excellent leadership by the Attorney-General Robert McClelland in these important areas of legal reform.
In developing the National Plan to Reduce Violence against Women, we recognise there are many programs and strategies already in place at different levels of government.
In New South Wales, for example, the Staying Home Leaving Violence program aims to ensure the safety of victims and their children. This involves the police removing the violent partner from the home.
In the Northern Territory, the Strong Family, Strong Community, Strong Future program trains and supports people in remote communities to work with families at risk of violence.
In South Australia, the rape and sexual assault service Yarrow Place provides clinical, forensic, medical and counselling support to victims of sexual assault.
In Victoria, the Male Adolescents at Risk project in the Dandenong region works to change the attitudes and behaviour of young adolescent boys and men who have shown aggressive or violent behaviour.
Here in the ACT, the Couch Surfing program provides young homeless people  -  many of whom would have experienced or witnessed domestic or family violence or sexual assault  -  with alternative housing options.
These and a range of other initiatives show that there are many people working to both reduce the level of violence perpetrated against women and to minimise the damage caused by such violence.
I commend each of you in the room here today who are engaged in the frontline of this very important work. It's hard work. It's difficult work. And it's necessary work.
But despite these excellent programs, the stark truth is that statistics on the incidence of sexual assault and family violence perpetrated against women and their children remain disturbingly high.
That is why we must work harder and smarter to tackle this challenge.
At the core of the challenge is this reality. There are many causes of violence against women. But there's one main cause. And that is the attitude of men towards women.
As the Council's report says and I quote:
''Violence is never caused or invited by the victim. The choice to use violence always, always rests with the perpetrator.”
I agree.
Our challenge is to change the attitudes of many Australian men, especially young men.
Of course most men are not violent against women, and most find violence repugnant and unacceptable as I do.
But that is how it must be for every Australian man and every Australian boy. Everyone. Every one of us, every one of my gender, every one of the male gender.
Every Australian male.
We know that most physical and sexual assaults are perpetrated by men that the women know and at home, and that the abuse is often repeated.
But what we do not know enough about is what really works in stopping men's violence.
We must address this gap in our knowledge so we can do more for children and women affected by violence within their families.
And to guarantee that we will do more, I am taking the initiative to move toward a national response to this problem.
I will write to my colleagues on the Council of Australian Governments, seeking their agreement to use COAG as a forum to develop a cross-government plan of action to reduce violence against women and children.
I will be asking the Premiers and Chief Ministers to work with me to produce a National Plan to Reduce Violence against Women for 2010.
COAG is the highest decision-making forum of the Commonwealth, State and Territory Governments.
It's right that this challenge is on the COAG agenda  -  alongside the big challenges of health, education and building infrastructure for our nation's future.
And the Australian Government's leadership in making a referral to COAG will significantly improve the effectiveness of all our efforts to reduce violence against women and their children in Australia.
Sexual assault and family violence takes a huge toll on Australian families, on Australian communities and in particular on Australian women.
The Australian Government is determined to take action against violence - both by assisting victims and addressing root causes.
With today's announcements, we are taking the first steps in responding to the report from the National Council to Reduce Violence against Women and their Children.
And we look forward to working with State and Territory governments towards this goal.
I urge all Governments and all Australians to join us as we work together to prevent violence against women and children.
I echo Tanya's thanks to all members of the Council  -  to Libby, Heather, Rachel, Pauline, Lisa, Andrew, Maria, Mel, Dorinda, Vanessa and Moira - thank you for the enormous amount of work you have done to produce the Time for Action report. I'm sure there's been some burning of the midnight oil.
And to produce four volumes like that, more than the midnight oil is burnt I suggest.
The Australian Government accepts the challenge you have given us.
And we look forward to working with other Australian governments, with many experts and outstanding individuals working in the community sector, to tackle this blight on our nation, and to build a safer future for Australian women and children.
This is a difficult subject for the nation to discuss. It's a hard subject for the nation to discuss. It's not a happy subject for the nation to discuss.
But none of those factors should prevent us from elevating it to part of our rolling national conversation.
Silence can no longer be tolerated because violence can no longer be tolerated. And violence prospers in the silence.
The challenge for all of us, government at all levels, you in the community sector and each of one of you as the young people and as the future of our nation, lies in this - to act together to make a difference. Personally, socially, institutionally, politically, in all that you do and all that you say.
It may be that when we look back on this gathering, in a school hall, on a cold morning in Canberra in April 2009, that we might just be able to say this  -  that on this day, we began to turn the corner.
I thank you. 


I was reflecting on Kathy Sullivan's story just a little while ago about what she described as the James Wood dinner, from 1996 involving Queensland parliamentary Liberals. I now know how Wal managed to minimise his expense account because if he had such a dinner with Labor members at the time it would have Wal and Arch Bevis. Mind you, Arch can knock a few back. 
But these were thin pickings in those days. And I actually was a candidate for the 96 election hoping to be here. But those of us who remember the events of 1996, running for Labor in those years was a bit like going over the top in the Somme in 1916. You could hear the whistling sound of shrapnel and then discover a few minutes later that it was actually targeted at you.
David just mentioned before the impact which Wal's journalism had on a generation of Queenslanders, a couple of generations of Queenslanders growing up with an interest in politics. My father died when I was quite young. My father used to read me, in fact he taught me how to read, reading from the bush Bible, Country Life. And I would sit  -  members of the Country Party in here just relax - and I would be sitting on his knee at his farm, he'd actually read me the headlines from the bush Bible.
And then he said one day, “And son, this is The Courier-Mail'. This was like this arrival of this exotic new journal and that's when I first heard, as a very young kid, of someone who my father used to read, which was Wallace Brown. That was quite some time ago.
So the radical journal in our household was The Courier-Mail, the orthodox delivery of news was of course Queensland Country Life. And that's shaped of course my own political world view ever since.
Part of the reason I'm here today is because I regarded Wal in the short number of years that I knew him here, as a friend. And I listened carefully to what Kathy said before about what is the first word which comes to your mind when you describe Wallace Brown. And the word without any further reflection is the one she used; a gentleman.
He had about him a certain other-worldliness. It was as if he came from a different age and there was a civility about the way in which he conducted himself with politicians of whichever hue. And I think Kathy is absolutely right, I wouldn't have had a clue which way Wal voted but he had about him a way of dealing with people which left a lasting impression with those of us on this side of the political divide, that is the practitioners as opposed to those who write on what the practitioners are doing.
The other thing that affects you about someone like Wal is he had this, he had the enormous gift of time. And you might say reflecting on what was often described as an earlier and gentler age where of course people would have a greater gift of time then  -  I'm not sure that's necessarily so. People of every generation have been busy. People engaged in reporting the national political life have been busy people. But whenever I sat down with Wal in that cubicle of his up there, in the parliamentary press gallery, whatever he was doing, whatever time of day it was, he always, even to the lowliest form of backbencher as I was, he'd always have the gift of time. Sit, talk, chat, reflect.
And I think if there is one great malady in our current political life it is the absence of time, the absence of conversation and the absence therefore of the reflection which arises from considered conversation. He had that gift as well.
He had a wicked sense of humour and with, most of which is unrepeatable so I won't. He  -  but it was enormously endearing. He had an enormous institutional knowledge. There is a great gift reflected among so many here today but thinning in number, who place how we strut and fret our hour upon the stage - and I've heard no more - in the context of the tide and time and times of events past.
It always seems as if what we do today is the single most important thing in the world. The virtue of those of greyer hair and greyer beard, is that they know that not to be the case. And there is a capacity and there was a capacity in Wal's case to actually reflect on where today sat in its importance relative to what Menzies and what Evatt may have been doing decades previous. And that was part of the gift of conversation that I valued with Wal.
I did not benefit from Black Velvets. I'm not even sure what a Black Velvet was but I've just been told by his son that a Black Velvet was a combination of Guinness and champagne. Guinness and champagne? This is a unique Queensland cultural contribution to our nation. I cannot begin to imagine how that tastes.
Mention was also made of the fact that with Wal we had a passionate environmentalist. It's true. Those of you who know from your own experience in conversations with him and his passionate commitment for the preservation of national parks, particularly those of which he was personally and directly engaged, know that this was not some fleeting interest, it was not some latter day conversion to forms of political correctness or anything like that, just a deep passion for the environment, a deep passion for nature, a deep passion to do something about it. And he did.
And the other thing that stands the starkest in our recollection of Wal is that he was equally passionate about the great State of Queensland. For him it went without saying that this was the most important place on God's earth. And you're smirking from The West Australian there. I just regard that as an ex cathedra pronouncement not worthy of cynical reflection from some on the other side of the continent.
And for him even in those days when Queensland had certain oddities attached to it - I'm referring to those interesting and challenging days of Johannes Bjelke-Petersen - and he had a big sense of Queensland identity. And also a big sense of not just Queensland being different, as Menzies famously said, but of Queensland being an essential part of our national fabric and a great contributor for the nation as well.
Wal Brown was all these things but for those of you who were his colleagues in the parliamentary press gallery, he was most importantly a pre-eminent journalist and he exhibited both the skill craft and the professionalism which rank at the highest levels of work that is done in this place.
I like one story about Wal's journalism which has a particular Queensland touch. One of his first rounds as reporter was as the weather roundsman for The Courier-Mail. My father would regard that as the most important round. You read the bush bible, understand what the crop prices are doing and what the weather is likely to be.
And so Wal had this duty at The Courier-Mail, and he had the bad luck of reporting during a severe drought. One day he got a weather bureau forecast that rain was on the way so with his offsider Jack Lunn, later editor of The Courier-Mail, Wal decided to give the drought breaking news a sharper angle.
And after getting the necessary background facts from the CSIRO - are they ever wrong?- he opened the article with the following stunning statement, quote: “Thousands of tonnes of water were poised in the clouds west of Brisbane last night ready to break the drought today” unquote.
We in public administration describe that as courageous. His editor loved it and it led page one. I imagine you have that slightly tremulous fear sometimes when a story of yours which you think is almost right but not quite there is suddenly plonked on page one. Maybe not. The problem was, there was no rain.
The rain depression headed sharply south down the coast and this was the moment when Wally and his mate Jack Lunn had to dig themselves out of a very large hole that they'd dug for themselves. And after being greeted by a very sombre editor the next morning, they asked “well Mr Brown”, as people were addressed in those days at The Courier-Mail, I'm advised, “how are you going to get us out of this one?”
Jack Lunn and Wal then had a brainstorm which also ran on page one the next day. The following, I think, objective headline. “NSW steals our rain”. Fair. Balanced. Insightful. Objective. And it got a run most importantly. At the end of the day, a true Queensland patriot.
And that's the sort of bloke we're here today to honour and he's still part and parcel of the fabric of who we all are. His conversations are alive in our minds, that wicked and winning smile of his and that marvellously piratical beard that he wore later in life. And so we are here today to honour him through this important award.
And the idea that we have a Wallace Brown Young Achiever Award for journalism is an important one.
As Kathy said, because of his gift of time, because of his interest in other people, he was always in the business of bringing the next generation on. And that's why those who have come up with this idea have got Wal absolutely right because it's all about how you encourage new people coming along in what is a critical profession for the nation and our conversation as a people.
For that reason I am delighted to present the Wallace Brown Young Achiever Award for Journalism for 2009. I am pleased to announce that the runner-up, I am pleased to announce the runner-up and winner for the 2009 Wallace Brown Young Achiever Award for Journalism.
The runners-up are Yuko Narushima and Sharri Markson.
The winner of the Wally Brown Award for 2009, Daniel Street from the Nine Network.


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose lands we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
It is an honour to launch officially the John Button Prize tonight.
It is equally an honour to serve as a patron of the John Button Foundation.
This will be the most lucrative prize in the nation for political writing.
And it's long overdue recognition of the importance of critical, thoughtful, political discourse beyond the Kibuki play that often passes for political debate in this country.
A healthy, vibrant democracy needs nourishment from healthy, vibrant political discourse.
Separating wheat from chaff.
Separating substance from sound bite.
Separating good policy from pure politics.
This Prize is about encouraging such public discourse for Australia.
It is also about saying that Australians value good writing and good public intellectual debate is important.
It's about saying that while the daily news is important, the deep trends of the decade past and the deeper trajectory for the decades ahead is even more important.
Put simply, it is saying that ideas matter, and that they matter profoundly, including Australia's response to the great global events that now confront the nation.
The Prize will award $20,000 to the best piece of writing on politics or public policy in Australia in the past 12 months.
The Foundation also hopes to be able to make a separate award to the best piece of public policy research, and, funds permitting, award a scholarship to an Indigenous student working in political science or public policy.
I strongly applaud each of these goals for the Foundation.
John Button
I am also pleased to see an award that will honour the life of John Button, a proud son of the Labor Party, a proud son of Victoria, and a proud son of Australia.
John Button was an remarkable Industry Minister; almost certainly the most effective minister ever to serve in that portfolio in Australian history.
He was an integral part of a government that played a critical role in transforming the Australian economy, from the closed, almost sclerotic economy of McEwenism in the past to the open economy of the future.
He and his colleagues were audacious, adventurous thinkers, not afraid to take hard decisions in the pursuit of long-term reform.
And the end point of their agenda: to advance opportunity for all, to reward individual hard work, achievement and success while always protecting the weak.
The good society.
As others have called it, the Great Society.
A public purpose well beyond the mere aggregation of individual greed  -  an exercise in aggregation that neo-liberals afford the gallant term “a philosophy”.
Some may describe unrestrained greed as a philosophy.
Others more accurately, an ideology.
Others again, neither philosophy nor ideology, simply a malady.
But John Button's contribution to Australia therefore goes beyond his role in internationalising the Australian economy and the transformation of Australian industry during the 1980s and 1990s.
John always understood that it was ideas that changed politics, that changed economies and that changed societies.
He understood that as a minister.
And he understood it when he left politics to write three books about his experience and his outstanding Quarterly Essay on the future of Labor, Beyond Belief, that won the Victorian Premiers Literary Award in 2003.
As John Cain said at his funeral last year, John Button was never a one-dimensional politician.
Some would say he was a great writer whose talent was lost on politics.
Others might say he was a great politician whose talents were wasted on writing.
I'd say he loved both politics and writing  -  and he made an outstanding, unique, contribution to both.
John Button's life offers inspiration for us all engaged in public life  -  that there is a land to occupy between the sterile world of political apparatchiks on the one hand and dreamy almost other-wordly intellectuals on the other.
Some might describe this as normal-land, be it of the left or of the right.
I call it a real political life, driven by ideas for the future but enjoyed equally in the brutal praxis of the present.
John was a big fan of George Orwell as a writer, and Ben Chifley as a politician.
He liked people who said it the way they thought it.
And that view informed his life as a politician and as a writer.
In his autobiography, As It Happened, he wrote about his early ambitions: 
“I wanted to be a writer. Other things happened. My life went in different directions, including a long spell in politics.''
Well, we in the Labor Party  -  and all Australians  -  are much the better for that.
His spirit has helped shape the soul of the modern Labor Party.
And political debate in Australia today is the lesser for John having left us.
Australian political writing
The establishment of the John Button Prize comes at a time of great political and intellectual change in Australia.
The most obvious observation one can make is of course the threat to traditional media from technological change.
Business models are changing as old revenue streams dwindle and readers switch online.
So too, the nightly news bulletins face much heavier competition from round-the-clock news services and online publications.
Media organisations are also in the front line of those affected by the global recession because of their sensitivity to changes in advertising and marketing spending.
The result seems to be that fewer resources will be stretched further.
Yet at the same time, we see new voices emerging both in traditional media and online.
There has perhaps never in our lifetimes been such a range of publishers and small magazines, producing such thoughtful explorations of Australian politics and culture.
Melbourne is home to many of them.
Indeed, the innovation experts would tell us that the cluster of small publishing houses in Melbourne represent something of an “innovation hub”.
Although I am cautious about such pronouncements - as the Premier can attest, when you hear such statements with an interesting adjective attached to the word “hub”, they are usually to a plea for public funds.
Among magazines we would think of Quarterly Essay and The Monthly among others  -  which have both seen some outstanding contributions.
They've also seen some very lengthy but nonetheless outstanding contributions  -  like a certain 7,700 word essay on the global financial crisis.
I doubt that particular contribution will get any nominations for the brevity division of the John Button Prize.
Haiku it is not.
We might also think of titles such as Meanjin and Overland  -  both of them great Australian titles that have been reinvigorated in recent years.
As well as Heat in Sydney and Griffith Review in Brisbane.
Among publishers, there is Penguin, a great publishing house that in recent years has renewed its focus on Australian culture with the publication of some great non-fiction books; there is also Text, Black Inc, Scribe and Melbourne University Press in Melbourne; while prominent names in Sydney include Allen and Unwin, Random House, Harper Collins and University of New South Wales Press; and then in Brisbane, the Queensland University Press.
In short, at a time when we are all crying ‘time poor', when the digital revolution is said to be atomising our attention spans, when some accuse the mainstream media of sensationalising the news, the truth is we are witnessing a welcome enlargement of our national intellectual life.
And allow me to say something quite revolutionary against the norms advanced by my predecessor  -  this is a good thing, not a bad thing.
The new media environment
As we all know, the mainstream media is facing profound challenges.
Newspapers all over the world are challenged by the capacity of the Internet to eat into their traditional reader base and advertiser revenues.
And they are challenged by the changing habits of the young, who get so much of their news and entertainment on-line.
Some pundits in the publishing world divide their readership into two groups  -  the “digital immigrants” and the “digital natives”.
The digital immigrants are those over 35 who as adults have migrated to the new digital world unfolding so fast around us.
Those under 35, by contrast, are digital natives. They live with ease in the digital world and less familiar with more traditional products such as hard copy newspapers and magazines, and even mainstream television news and current affairs.
In this schema, I'm unashamedly an immigrant, and I carry two passports.
An immigrant who reads a lot on his blackberry.
But who loves going home to the thwack of the paper on the front step on the weekend, to read the news stretched out on a bold and physical canvas.
The challenge for both our professions  -  politics and journalism  -  or, more broadly, politics and writing  -  or politics and the media  -  is to continue to preserve a public commons through which the nation can continue to have a public discourse on the nation's present the nation's future.
This is not just the responsibility of public broadcasting, important as that may be.
It is a wider responsibility for us all in public and private broadcasting, new and old media, in politics and in journalism.
This challenge is made greater with the individualisation and the atomisation of debate that has been accelerated by the revolution in information technology  -  a process that has reduced the role of traditional media that serve as a common forum for the great debates of our age.
Because what is ultimately at stake here is how our democracy itself evolves - given the traditional means through which a democracy has had much of its life, being and conversation for the last half century is undergoing radical transformation.
This will require careful husbanding by us all.
But the encouraging news is that both because of and despite the information revolution, public intellectual debate in Australia is alive and well.
It's my hope that the John Button Prize becomes a prestigious award for the best of Australian journalism and political writing.
In particular, I hope it can throw a spotlight on the best emerging talent among writers.
And in an age when we can more easily treat ourselves to the best of international journalism, I hope it can nurture a distinctly Australian voice.
If it succeeds in so doing, it will help build a richer political culture, a stronger democracy and therefore a more humane future.
And it comes at a time when there is a whole new public debate opening up around the world on the future of social democracy after the collapse of the prevailing neoliberal orthodoxy  -  a debate about the future that is more open now than at any time in the last quarter of a century.
So with great optimism in the future of our democracy at large, and great enthusiasm for the great debate now launched on the future of our social democratic project both here and abroad, I'm delighted to launch the John Button Prize, and to pay tribute to John himself, a pioneer in this great enterprise.


This Community Jobs Summit is my crazy idea, okay? I'm to blame for it, if it works that's great, if it doesn't I'm responsible. I've sat down with Brendan the other day, the Minister, and Julia the Deputy Prime Minister and said how can we pool together the best brains, the best ideas, the best innovations across the country to make a difference at the local level to the challenge which now confronts us all with the global recession. A recession which now washes across Australia's shores as well and which then has a direct impact on local jobs in local communities across our country.
Therefore the purpose of today is simply to get our sleeves rolled up and have a go and see what ideas come out of this, how we learn from the past and how we innovate for the future.
As Tony has just indicated, I intend to be here for most of the day and I'm going to be in listening mode; I want to hear what you've got to say. Because a lot of you have a bucket load of experience in things that work and things that don't. And I have one central organising principle which is: I am all for positive ideas, and I'm all for positive ideas which work and which have some prospect of delivering a real result on the ground.
I'm not faintly interested in elaborate bureaucracies, I'm not faintly interested in new systems of government, at least in terms of today's conversation. What I am interested in is what works at the local community to make a difference in terms of local jobs and local training. Very practical stuff, each community and their circumstances are different but you know something? There are principles and there are lessons to be learned from the experience of valuable organisations such as yours. And the single purpose of today is to harness that. And then to go out to the fields and multiply. That's our intention. So thank you for spending this time with us today on a bright and a little frosty morning here in Melbourne.
The other reason that I wanted everyone here today is because I wanted to underline one core principle of the Government's response to the global recession and its impact on Australia and it is this: we are all in this together. Every one of us. Governments, unions, businesses, the community sector  -  every one of us. Governments at all level, federal, State, local. Businesses, big, medium and small. Unions, right across the country. The community sector, the church and charitable sector, the not-for-profit sector, the social enterprise sector. We are all in this together.
And the great thing about this country of ours Australia is that when we do things together in response to external adversity, we're absolutely fantastic. We do make a difference and if there's one difference I see emerging in this country compared with what I see in other parts of the world it is that in other parts of the world when you see duress, when you see stress coming off the back of deep economic challenges, many of those communities, many of those societies and in fact many of those nations fracture right down the middle.
The stuff of this nation is quite different. We're different to that because we do have an instinct that when there is a big, big challenge out there that if we team up and work with each other we can make a power of difference. And when I look at all you good folk from the community and social enterprise sector from across Australia, I see people who are deeply committed and deeply intelligent in their engagement about how to make a difference.
So one, we're all in this together. Two, I want to know what works at the local level and therefore I am going to be listening very carefully to contributions through the day and I'll be here for a large slice of it and Julia later on.
The Government has been upfront with the Australian people that the unemployment forecasts in the Budget will be revised up. There is absolutely no point in sugar coating this fact. The global recession is costing jobs in Australia, which will be reflected in significantly increased unemployment forecasts on Budget night.
The exact forecasts will be finalised and published in the Budget, which means they cannot be released until Budget night. But Australia is actively working, actively seeking to address the impact of the global recession on Australia and independent assessments so far of the Australian Government's response to the financial crisis, be it through the International Monetary Fund, through the OECD or through Access Economics have been strongly positive in relation to the actions we've taken so far.
But our purpose as a Government and as a nation must be absolutely clear cut. We must resolve together not to let this recession steal the future of a generation of Australians. And in particular, we won't let it condemn a generation of young Australians to chronic long-term unemployment. That must be our mission statement and working together we can make a huge impact on it.
I've welcomed already today our co-hosts, the Brotherhood, the Salvation Army, The Society of St Vincent de Paul and Mission Australia. These are good organisations, doing good work. I also want to welcome our seven temporary Local Employment Co-ordinators, who we have appointed in the areas of most intense unemployment across the country now. And they are already on the job getting on with the task of making a difference in those communities.
Furthermore, we are here today to work out how best we deploy the resources of our $650 million Jobs Fund and in partnership with our highly innovative and committed community sector, how we make the best use of those funds. And as I said we have the input also of the likes of Lindsay Fox and Bill Kelty to draw from their experience in times past but also critically, their ideas about how we address these challenges for the immediate future.
A word or two about the size of the sectors represented in this room today. The community sector is huge. It's a vibrant part of not just our society but a vibrant part of our economy. It has a lot to teach Government. According to our ABN records we have 41,000 not-for-profit organisations in Australia - 41,000. They employ 850,000 people and nearly two and a half million volunteers. That is a truckload of Australians, that is a huge number of our national community doing good work for the country.
Many more community sector organisations are among the 650,000 organisations that are set up as registered incorporated bodies or as trusts or similar structures. Most people in this hall today are part of this sector, and many of you work with disadvantaged communities. That means that puts all you in the front line of the work in which we are now collaboratively engaged in responding to the greatest economic crisis since the Great Depression three quarters of a century ago.
The Government in its response to the crisis has sought to deal with it at multiple levels; global action, national action, local action. Local action you'll be familiar with through the work that we have done in the G20. Work on global economic stimulus, $5 trillion worth of investment into the global economy by the governments representing the 20 largest economies in the world.
Combined action to also provide resources for the International Monetary Fund to make sure that it can intervene effectively should there be systemic collapse in the economies or financial systems of emerging economies around the world.
Collaborative action also to deal with the restoration of the health of the world's leading private financial institutions, the extraction of toxic assets, the re-capitalisation of the world's biggest banks in order to restore the normal flow of private credit in the global economy.
Action also collaboratively to design new rules for the global financial system because the old rules have plainly failed and failed miserably.
And finally action collaboratively to draw a line under protectionism because protectionism, if we're mindful of the lessons of the 1930s, is what took that extraordinary economic crisis and turned it into an even worse crisis culminating in the appalling events of 1939. Global action.
National action, you're equally familiar with. The work that we are doing to prosecute a national economic stimulus strategy to make a difference in this economy. There are two broad approaches. You either simply let the free market rip under these circumstances, that's the ideology which has landed us in large part in the mess we've got ourselves into across the world. Or Government stepping up to the plate and stepping in to make a difference.
Government can't solve all the problems which have been created by the mistakes made in financial markets but we can make a difference. Governments cannot prevent a global economic recession impacting directly on Australia but we can reduce the impact and that's what we're doing. This national economic stimulus strategy of ours is clear cut, it's about one central organising principle: how do we provide jobs and training now and at the same time build the infrastructure that we need for tomorrow? That's it. That's what we're trying to do.
How are we going about it? Short term stimulus, providing direct incentives by trebling the first home owners' grant to assist the private residential construction industry. Look at the data around the world, our residential construction sector against those in most other OECD economies, we're doing a lot better.
Also we're providing temporary and short term stimulus to pensioners, carers, veterans, through direct payments to support the one and a half million Australians who work in the Australian retail sector and again compare and contrast the growth in Australian retail sales here relative to what has occurred in retail sales in the United Kingdom, the United States and elsewhere. It's a direct consequence of government policy in both areas.
That's short term stimulus.
Medium term stimulus. We're now investing in the single largest school modernisation program the country has ever seen. We're investing the equivalent of 1.5 per cent of GDP, about $15 billion, in building state-of-the-art libraries, multipurpose halls, state-of-the-art science centres, state-of-the-art language centres in the schools of Australia with one objective - to turn every primary school in the country into a construction site. To provide jobs for tradies and for others here and now and build the schools we want for tomorrow for our kids.
The same in social housing and the same also in our investment in energy efficiency.
And then long term infrastructure. Short term stimulus, medium term stimulus by building infrastructure like schools, long term stimulus by investing in much needed infrastructure such as the National Broadband Network - investment of up to $43 billion, more than 4 per cent of GDP, in order to provide the infrastructure we need for tomorrow, but a massive injection in providing jobs and training-related opportunities in the here and now.
That's our strategy in a nutshell but that's national action.
Local action is equally important. Local action, which has as its organising principle how do we take all these government stimulus measures, how do we take the Government's provision of training programs and make a difference with the community sector from the ground up?
The day after I got off the plane in London from the G20 Summit about a month ago, I went to the City of Casey here in Melbourne here in Melbourne and gave a speech. And the Brotherhood was with us on that occasion as well. It was about this: a Jobs and Training Compact with Australia. Three parts to it. A Jobs and Training Compact with Young Australians, how do we make a difference? Secondly, a Jobs and Training Compact with Australians who have been retrenched through no fault of their own and thirdly, a Compact with local communities.
With young Australians, the principle is this - I do not want to see a generation of our young people saddled with unemployment and saddled with the impact of unemployment which causes them to become a lost generation. I do not want that to happen. I want us to take every creative measure possible to make a difference now on the way through. And that's why we've been absolutely clear cut about our earn or learn policy for people under the age of 25.
We want kids to make sure that they have a year 12 or year 12 equivalent qualification. If they're under 20, if they are without a year 12 graduation or an equivalent qualification, to go back and get one. If you're under 25 and you're out of work, to use that opportunity to go and find and obtain a local training place. And the Government providing a universal entitlement for those under 25 to give effect to that in order to make a difference with young Australians.
Secondly, our Compact with Australians who've been retrenched with no fault of their own. How do we make a difference there? And obviously that's where our priority employment coordinators come into effect as well.
But we've sat down with the banks for example and sought to organise an arrangement with them whereby if you are retrenched and you are in possession of a mortgage or a personal loan for a car, the banks subject to circumstances will engage in a negotiation with retrenched Australians in order to provide a better and more flexible arrangement for the repayment of mortgages and car loans over time. In order to provide some support at a time when families are at their most concerned for the loss of a job, particularly if it's the principle bread-winner.
Other measures as well that we've announced to support those Australians who've been retrenched through no fault of their own.
Third element, our Compact with Local Communities and this is where you the good people in this room come so much directly into focus. How do we make a difference from the ground up? How do we make a difference in terms of social enterprises tailored to the circumstances of each community across the country?
We're not just here to make fine sounding speeches, we're not just here to say “here's a bucket of money of the $650 million Local Jobs Fund, off you go”. We actually want to make sure that we do make a real difference and I've listened very carefully to what various of our leaders from the church and charitable sector have said in the past about the importance of not-for-profit initiatives. I've listened very carefully to that.
And so what we want to do is generally work in partnership, not just with a fine sounding speech saying “okay let's get together because we're concerned about this and you go off into the fields and have a go”. No. Us being partners with you. Partners with you by providing a fund which can be drawn upon. Partners with you by providing a network of priority employment coordinators and through them an ability to access the existing national training programs and other infrastructure initiatives which inject funds, capital and money into local communities which are under duress.
And that brings us right back to the purpose of being here today and that is to listen to what you folk have got to say and to present. When we talk about unemployment, when we talk about the impact of this recession, there is always a tendency in the national economic debate to talk about this in terms purely of statistics. Each one of those statistics, as you know well from your own life and commitment, is a human family, a human face, a human person possessed of an intrinsic dignity and our job is to make a difference to them.
Already the Government has sought to make a difference in some of these areas. Our investment in schools, much of it in the poorer schools of the country. Our investment in a new national healthcare agreement including additional funding for our public hospitals to help those Australians of limited means, our investment also in social housing to reduce the blight of homelessness in our community both through the new national housing strategy, our new strategy on homelessness, together with the $6 billion plus investment in social housing which I referred to before. Also our $4 billion plus investment in closing the gap with indigenous Australians.
These are measures we're taking nationally. They are being implemented. But what we are here to talk about is how do we make most advantage of these national programs to make a difference locally.
I do not come here as Prime Minister of Australia with a set of prescriptions or a set piece set of announcements to make after today's deliberations are done. I look carefully at this agenda, I am interested in it. I am interested in what you have to say in each element on this agenda. And if I'm not here for all of it, I want to hear a report back on what's been concluded.
Because the central purpose of this is to distill the deliberations in which we're engaged today and the principles which we can apply in priority unemployment communities right across the country and to give effect to that through our priority employment coordinators in partnership with you, the community sector.
So ladies and gentlemen, thanks for being here. I think it's time for us all to roll up our sleeves and in the best Australian tradition, have a go. Have a damned, darn good go at making a difference here in communities right across Australia. With your effort, your participation and your ideas, I believe we can do just that. I thank you.


[Acknowledgements]
The national roll call is important I think because you are a family. And the Lions community across Australia is an important part of our national family.
It doesn't matter where I go in the country. What I have seen in town squares, in natural disasters, in all sorts of city and community occasions Lions out there working, working for the local community.
The fact that you have such extensive reach across the country and the fact that Lions has such an extensive reach across the world is because you are there doing good work for your communities and making them stronger. And if I could just say one word of encouragement to you today, all power to your arms here today.
You're so much a part of the fabric of our national life. And it is worth thinking this: Were it not for community service organisations such as Lions out there doing the voluntary community work in each of the towns and cities and rural districts and communities that you represent each day, our national life, our national community life would be infinitely poorer. So as Prime Minister of Australia, I salute the work of Lions.
Lions are also to blame for me being in politics. So any of you who have reservations about the things that I might do these days, they all began in a Lions Club in Nambour back in the 1970s. Anybody here from Nambour? Sunshine Coast? Okay, good on you.
So Lions year to year and I gather you're going to have a similar gathering here today with the national finalists. Now I first began public speaking at a Lions Youth of the Year competition, way back when. I think I made the local round, I think I got to the regional round and then I got to the district and then got knocked out. Something like that. And we kept the names and addresses of all those judges. I'm still here, you know. Cracking down to get to the end.
But the very important thing is you give young kids a go. And my father was a share-farmer, mum was a nurse and I wouldn't been much past primary school. It was the first of hard times and many of you come from those times. But given the youngster of the day from a Queensland country town and from the local state primary school, local state high school, you provide young kids an opportunity to spend up, think about what they believe in and (inaudible).
And you give them experience. You give them opportunities, the same time you infiltrate into those some people sense that life is not just about me, myself and I, it's about something broader as well. So, thank you Lions for giving me a go.
I said before that you're out there part and parcel, the fabric of our national community life. I saw that (inaudible) recently, evidence to the Victorian bushfires. Let's just pause and reflect for a moment about what that was. In the more than 200 years of settled history in this continent, this is our single greatest national disaster. Our single, greatest natural disaster. And the gates of hell were opened to the good people of Victoria.
When I in the days following that disaster, went around and talk to the people of those fire affected communities, it was organisations like Lions that I saw on the ground doing practical work.
I remember allocating a couple of hours to walk around in the community of Kinglake and many, many hours after that, talking, speaking with people whose lives had been destroyed in so many respects.
But then finally, the people making the hamburgers, the people making food, the people supporting those in the frontline, they were all from local Lions clubs, out there doing their work in a quiet, quiet understated by highly effective way.
And it's not just seeing Lions at work, acts at the cold face in the Victorian bushfires. But if you were to roll through the list of every natural disaster which occurred in Australia, Lions has been there as well. Working hard, sleeves rolled up. And not just natural disasters but at all other forms of community engagement, making a difference. Small projects, larger national projects, intensely local projects which mean things to local communities.
There with sleeves rolled up, doing the work. And this again returns to the theme of my remarks here today, this part and parcel of being part of our Australian family and community life.
Not just what you do here at home, which your Lions International President, with us today, (inaudible) work which you do internationally. Because wherever I travel in the world, across Asia and across Europe, I always see the Lions photograph, the local club ready to deal with the local community challenges in that country, in that community. And this is a good thing.
I was talking to your International President before about the work which Lions had done in responding quickly, to the supply of tents to the victims of the Sichuan earthquake in China, not many years ago. Tents which you previously given to Sweden which were flown from Sweden to China, courtesy of the Swedish Government. To make a difference, a practical difference for local people on the ground suffering the calamity of nature.
So whether it is work in your local community, work for the nation, or work around the world, there is an underlying ethos here which is that you are working for something bigger and broader than yourself. Bigger and broader than your self-interest. Bigger and broader than what is often described as the ethos of our age, summed up in three principles: me, myself and I. And you stand out, as living examples of (inaudible) ethos. And this is a good thing.
If you look at the importance of the community sector more broadly, it is important to see the work that you do as part of the wider work which the community, charitable, not for profit, non-government sector is engaged in this country and around the world.
I have a strong view which is that governments, while they can provide strong, national direction, can provide a strategy for the way in which the nation should go. It's made infinitely more possible and more effective by ongoing creative and constructive engagement with the community sector of which you're a part. Because if you go to the local fabric of local community life, what governments do is important. What we do to provide national policy, what we do to provide economic stimulus, what we do to provide support for the unemployed, what we do to provide support for the church and charitable organisations directly ourselves. But, the effectiveness of what is done on the ground is added to immeasurably by being partners with what you do on the ground. It makes a huge difference.
The idea that somehow governments, from remote locations like Canberra, can dictate what should be the solutions in Whittlesea, in Wanniassa or in other parts of our country is just wrong. Local, effective creative engagement with the community sector, the charitable sector, the not for profit sector, makes it infinitely more effective.
Which brings me to the challenge all governments around the world are facing right now. And that is the great challenge of the global economic recession. The great challenge of the recession which now washes across Australian shores and therefore how should we respond. Our response as a government has been clear cut. We're engaged globally through the G20. The largest economies in the world, Australia's one of them. Representing 85 per cent of global gross domestic product. And we have taken decisions after our terrific meeting in London on how to chart a strategy of the global economic recovery.
Acting on a global economic stimulus together, acting on the need to restore to global institutions like the International Monetary Fund to deal with the challenges which lie ahead. Acting to deal with problems of systematically returning the health of the world's leading private financial institutions, acting elaborately to craft the rules for the future of the global financial system, given the rules of the past have failed most dismally. And acting to draw a line under an outbreak of protectionism, which will retard any recovery and destroy jobs everywhere.
Nationally, engage also in every level of economic stimulus strategy to make a difference to jobs on the ground today while building the infrastructure for tomorrow. In a nutshell, that's what we seek to do. The biggest school modernisation program in Australia's history. The biggest investment in the social housing in the history of the Commonwealth. A strategy to make every Australian owner occupied dwelling energy efficient through the installation of ceiling installation. But all one objective in mind, creating jobs today and building the infrastructure we need for tomorrow.
And so for our long term infrastructure project, building a National Broadband Network again creating jobs today and it will begin in the great state of Tasmania in the second half of this year; a massive investment of up to $43 billion. Where the objective again is to create the infrastructure we need for tomorrow as well.
They're our national actions. But on the local front, that's where we come to partnership with organisations such as yours as well. Because we need to make a difference (inaudible) with each person, each valuable member of our human family who is affected and afflicted by the impact of unemployment. These are not statistics. These are valuable members of our Australian family. And therefore, this through no fault of their own, a person who loses their job or cannot find a job, or is at risk of losing their job.
Our job as an Australian family is to bond together around them, against one simple axiom and that is that we are all in this together. Each and every one of us. Governments: national, state and local. Business and unions. Governments and the community sector. All working together. Because this is a challenge and a threat which originated way beyond our shores. But its consequences we must deal with effectively at the local level.
The challenge of the local level is to make a difference. I've described this as a Jobs and Training Compact with Australia. And yesterday at the Council of Australian Governments meeting in Hobart, we agreed as all governments of Australia, Liberal and Labor, national, state and territory, on a Compact with Young Australians.
What is it in a nutshell? For every young Australian under the age of 25, should either be earning or learning. Earning or learning. And that is, if you don't have a year 12 equivalent qualification, we're going to make that opportunity available to you. If you're under the age of 20 and you don't have a year 12 equivalent qualification, either through school or the vocation employment sector, to make a training opportunity available to you. If you're under the age of 25 and you can't find a job or you lost a job, to make a training place available to you. This guarantee, this entitlement to a training place for our young Australians, I believe is so important, so important to dealing effectively with the impact of this recession for a local level.
There are two points to it. One, to learn from the past and not create a generation of unemployed Australians. So that when this downtime occurs as a consequence of the flows on from the global economy, we turn adversity into opportunity and provide training opportunities for our young people to attain the skills necessary to upgrade their skills when the recovery comes. And secondly, it is very important also, that when the recovery comes that all of the skills available within the nation are tuned directly to participate in the demands of business. That's our guiding philosophy.
But it's also reinforced with the second principle, which is to make our welfare support plan for our young people conditional, on the way in which those young people engage in training opportunities. We need to do both these things together. Because what we want is to make sure that our young people are supported, which through no fault of their own can't find a job. But at the same time that they are provided with a training opportunity in order to secure a job once the recovery comes.
So we in Government are engaged directly with that work on the ground. But one of the things that makes it important, working with local community organisations is how can we team together to make a difference nationwide, with local community projects, local initiatives like local government, local training opportunities and other social enterprises to make a difference in your community. Each one of the communities that you come from, from across our great country.
When I leave here, I'm going to a conference for the better part of the day, co-hosted between myself and the Brotherhood of St Lawrence in Melbourne, to look at one question. How can the community sector, the not for profit sector, the social enterprise sector, partner with Government - state, local and national - to make a difference with local jobs and local training opportunities.
The intention is not simply to have fine words. The intention is to have local deeds. How does it work? And I'm not about to dictate from Canberra and from the distance of the nation's capital, what (inaudible) community.
So we want to engage every family and community organisations in each community of the country to make a difference in their community about the human face of unemployment. How do we generate local projects? How do we generate local social enterprise? How do we build local training opportunities? Taking maximum advantage of the national programs we put in place.
But that's for organisations like Lions (inaudible). Each one of you as community leaders will have an idea about what could and should happen in your community. So my invitation to all of you is to get involved. Walk into your local government authority and say ‘I've got an idea about what we can do'. There's a local jobs fund which will be established by the Australian Government, it will be delivered through the priority employment coordinators in the most unemployed affected, employment affected areas in the country.
But that is just half the equation. The other half is building on local community enterprise effort and initiative. And so what I'll be saying to your organisation and organisations right across in the country is one simple principle: we are all in this together and together we can make a difference.
I can't stand before you as the Prime Minister of Australia and say I can stop something as large as the global economic recession. What I can say, is that by deploying the efforts of government and engaging directly in the not for profit sector, we can make a difference. We can reduce the impact. We can cushion the blow.
And if we actually have a spirit about us which harnesses all the nation's energy and intellectual effort and its passion for justice and doing the right thing by our fellow Australians, then we're going to come through this in fine shape. But it will be tough and the road will be hard. But I'm confident of the ethos of (inaudible) and see Australia through.
To conclude, your organisation as I said in my introductory remarks is also active globally. Building the ties that bind across the world. Lions clubs everywhere. You may not be conscious of it but the work that you do and other international community organisations do, has actually created this great fabric of ties across the international community which transcends the great divide, which transcends religious divide, which transcends the political divide, which transcends the national divide.
This is important work and I commend you in it. Because when you take that work into account and build into it, the other work of global, community and service organisations, we again move towards our point in our global discourse of nations, that the big challenge of the future, the challenges for us all, challenges of the economy, challenges of climate change, challenges of water, challenges of police security - each of them beyond the purview by and large of single national governments. But as the global community acting together and cooperatively, we can make a global difference as well. As you seem to do with the good work of Lions International.
I congratulate you in your work and wish you every success in this great conference of this great organisation.


This is a good day for the Australian Defence Force, this is a good day also for the Australian nation. It is a good day for the men and women who serve our nation in uniform. 
The first responsibility of any Government is to provide for the national security of Australia. And for this Government there is no higher priority. Our defence force lies at the absolute core of our national security framework. Without a strong defence force, the rest of the framework would be weak, it would be hollow and it would be ineffective. With a strong defence force, our national security framework has strength at its core.
Australia's national security will face increasing challenges in the coming years as our security environment changes and the Australian Government must remain vigilant in responding to those challenges and to those changes. As the Minister said before, it is almost a decade since Australia conducted a thorough review of its national defence. That is why we have fulfilled our commitment to deliver a comprehensive Defence White Paper once we came to Government.
The decisions I set out today are designed to make Australia ready for the range of challenges that are likely to emerge.
Today this Government releases the Defence White Paper to build Force 2030. - the defence force Australia will need for the next generation to meet the national security challenges of the future. Today therefore is an important preparation day for the challenges that lie ahead, an important day also therefore for the nation itself.
Before discussing the kind of defence force we will need in the future, we must first assess our strategic operating environment. We launch this White Paper today in a strategic environment different from that described by the last White Paper almost a decade ago.
Some trends that emerged that had emerged before then, such as the increasing pace of globalisation and state fragility in our near neighbourhood, continue. But other trends such as the rise of terrorism, the realignment of global and regional power realities and emerging threats such as border protection, climate change and resource security represent newer dynamics that will also affect our strategic and security environment for the future.
The key features of Australia's future security environment are as follows. First it is our clear conclusion that the United States will remain the most powerful and influential actor out to 2030. No other power, no other power will have the military, economic or strategic capacity to challenge US primacy over the period covered by this White Paper.
Furthermore our alliance with the United States will remain the bedrock on which Australia's national security is built. It is an alliance that has prospered under 13 United States Presidents and 13 Australian Prime Ministers and it continues with that strength for the future. This alliance is enduring and remains vital to Australia's future defence.
Within the Asia-Pacific Region economic growth should help foster stability and security but there are likely to be tensions between the major powers where the interests of the United States, China, Japan, India and Russia intersect.
While the chance of direct confrontation between any of these major powers is small, there is always the possibility of miscalculation.
China will continue to be a key driver of economic activity both globally and in the region in the period out to 2030. It will also be Asia's strongest military power by a wide margin, and China is likely to develop a significant military capability commensurate with its size. The management of the relationship between the United States and China will be critical for stability in the Asia-Pacific region.
Within Southeast Asia and Indonesia, economic and social development will continue. The evolution of Indonesia as a stable democratic state with strong social cohesion is important to our strategic interests and provides it with a strong platform for long-term stability and prosperity. The success of Indonesia's democratic transformation under President Yudhoyono and under his leadership is an important contribution to our longer-term regional stability.
In the South Pacific and East Timor, economic, social and political instability will continue to present challenges to our strategic interests. This may create conditions in which Australia might be required to respond with security and humanitarian assistance, as we have done in the past. Coalition operations in support of our wider interests will also remain critical. And as I stated this past Tuesday on our enhanced contribution to Afghanistan, we must not allow Afghanistan to once again become the unimpeded training ground and operating base for global terrorist activity.
Within this environment that sees shifts in the alignment of global power, regional uncertainty and the continuing threat of terrorism, we also see new challenges that will face our defence force out to 2030. Most significantly, the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMD) is of serious concern. There is a risk that the number of states with a ‘break-out' capability to produce WMD will increase due to the proliferation of dual-use infrastructure and the continued operation of WMD proliferation networks.
And we see new security risks also emerging over the potential impact of climate change and resource security. These trends are likely to exacerbate existing problems in governance and population in developing countries.
The environment I have just described will present our defence forces with challenges of a new and different order to those we have faced before. We must have a flexible and effective force to deal with a wider range of contingencies. Contingencies that range from stabilisation operations and humanitarian and disaster relief to the more remote possibility of direct conflict.
In shaping Force 2030 we don't just need to know our strategic environment, we also need to know the primary tasks that our Defence Force will need to be able to perform. Australia's defence policy is based on the core principle of self reliance in the direct defence of Australia. This means that we must have the ability to conduct independent military operations in the defence of Australia by controlling our air and sea approaches and denying any potential adversary the ability to operate in our immediate neighbourhood.
There is no more important task for the Australian Defence Force than the defence of Australia and it is around this task that our force is shaped. But we also need to do conduct other tasks when it is in our interests to do so. This means we need to have the capacity to act independently where we have unique interests at stake and do not wish to be reliant on the combat forces of others, lead military coalitions where we have shared strategic interests at stake with others and make tailored contributions to military coalitions where we share wider strategic interests with others.
These objectives shape the priority tasks that our defence forces will be required to undertake in the strategic environment out to 2030. These tasks are: deterring and defeating attacks on Australia by controlling our air and sea approaches against credible adversaries, contributing to Stability and Security in the South Pacific and East Timor by assisting our neighbours in dealing with humanitarian and disaster relief, and on occasion stabilisation interventions as we have done in the past.
Further, contributing to military contingencies in the wider Asia-Pacific Region including by way of assisting our Southeast Asian partners to meet external challenges and contributing to military contingencies in support of global security by supporting the efforts of the international community in upholding a rules-based global order, where our interests align and where we have the capacity to do so.
In order to undertake these tasks in an increasingly demanding strategic environment, we will need a force that is capable of confronting a wide range of contingencies both now and into the future. Making that happen will require significant long term investment but that investment is in our long term national interest and will help secure our nation and our people for decades to come. That is why we have decided to acquire Force 2030.
One of the great mistakes of military strategy throughout history has been to prepare to fight the last war. The Australian Government is determined not to repeat that error. We need to ensure that our defence forces are shaped in the geo-political realities of the century ahead. That is why this defence paper looks forward to 2030 and seeks to determine what our defence forces will need over the next 20 years.
Force 2030 represents the most powerful, integrated and sophisticated set of military capabilities that our nation has ever acquired in order to plan effectively for our nation's future national security needs. It is a force that provides us with the reach, weight and flexibility to undertake the principal tasks for the Australian Defence Force.
Force 2030 represents a long-term investment in Australia's security, and the White Paper describes the key capability elements that comprise the force. These capabilities include increasing our major naval assets by one third, doubling the size of our submarine fleet and transforming our surface fleet from light to heavy Frigates and destroyers.
Force 2030 will include therefore the following:
     * 12 future submarines, which will be Australia's largest ever single defence project. They will be capable of anti-ship and anti-submarine warfare, strategic strike, intelligence collection and support for special operations forces;
     * Air-Warfare Destroyers and a new class of Frigates to replace the ANZAC class ships, to provide enhanced anti-submarine warfare and air defence capabilities. This will give us greater flexibility in protecting our air and sea approaches, and provide greater protection for our troops on operation;
     * New maritime-based land-attack cruise missiles to enhance the capabilities of the Air Warfare Destroyers and future combat ships and submarines;
     * New Naval Combat Helicopters, to further enhance our maritime capabilities and in particular anti-submarine warfare;
     * Around 100 Joint Strike Fighters, to provide a potent air combat capability to 2030;
     * New Wedgetail Early Warning and Control aircraft, to provide greatly enhanced situational awareness and an ability to control and coordinate other aircraft;
     * New maritime surveillance and response aircraft, to provide enhanced capabilities for protecting our borders;
     * Around 1,100 new armoured combat vehicles to provide greater protection, mobility and fire-power for our troops;
     * Networking of our land forces, to ensure that our men and women in uniform are more effective on operations;
     * Maintaining the capability edge and effectiveness of our Special Forces, so that their formidable combat edge is not only preserved but expanded; and
     * Enhancing our cyber-warfare capabilities, by establishing a Cyber Security Operations Centre that will provide a greater capacity to respond to cyber-threats and improve our response to incidents in cyberspace.
Force 2030 will mean the best fighter jets, the most versatile armoured vehicles and the most sophisticated submarines available to defend Australia's national security. This is only a brief snapshot of the capabilities that form the basis of Force 2030. It is a force that provides the ADF with greater depth, power and survivability for the next two decades. Force 2030 prepares us for the next generation of challenges that our defence force and Australia as a nation will face.
The White Paper also sets out a range of major new commitments. It is also important is to renew, to repair and to refit the kit and equipment that we already have and the facilities that support it. That is why this defence paper also focuses strongly on remediating the defence force we have today so this it can operate better for tomorrow.
Over the next decade, we will be devoting approximately $30 billion to fixing the existing force. This includes approximately $6 billion for more than 50 new projects to fill the crucial gaps that have been left in equipment and protection for our women and men in uniform. Approximately $18 billion to top-up existing projects that have been under-funded in the past and approximately $6 billion to fix systems and infrastructure that support our women and men in uniform.
Central to the strategy laid out in this White Paper is the need to ensure that our plan is affordable. Some have argued that in the global economic recession we should reduce defence spending to ease the pressure on the budget. But the Government believes the opposite to be true. In a period of global instability Australia must invest in a strong, capable and well resourced defence force.
Defence policy must look over the horizon, not just of the next year but of the decades ahead. In setting defence policy we must remember that the economic challenges of today do not negate the security challenges of tomorrow. We must deal with the challenges of the global recession today and at the same time prepare for the major, the major challenges in the future, central to which is the future challenge of national security for the nation.
Our dedication to our own security must be constant and uncompromising. That is why, for the first time, this Government has committed to real funding stability for Defence, to enable Defence to plan with certainty its capability goals in the long term. The key elements of this funding profile include maintaining three per cent real growth in Defence's budget out to 2017-18, 2.5 per cent fixed indexation designed to offset Defence against the cost of inflation to its business and long-term growth of 2.2 per cent from 2018-2030.
These measures will ensure that Defence is able to meet its goals for Force 2030.They provide Defence with a coherent funding envelope for long term planning. Importantly this funding envelope also ensures that any shortfalls against the White Paper funding I have just outlined will be fully offset by Defence. Because like every other sector of Government, Defence must be accountable and disciplined in its use of public resources.
None of these measures I have described today can be effective if we do not invest in the people that we need to operate, support and maintain our capabilities. That is why this White Paper describes a people strategy aimed at providing a more strategic approach to managing people in defence, nurturing the skills of our defence professionals, ensuring that defence families are looked after and enhancing our ability to attract and retain the very best of our men and women in uniform.
The people of defence, of the Australian Defence Force are a world-class group of professionals. They are the most valuable capability of a modern defence force. Theirs is our nation's highest calling. Supporting them is one of our greatest responsibilities in safeguarding our nation's security.
To conclude, the White Paper that we've released today is possibly the most significant contribution to defence planning in a generation. It outlines a clear plan for Force 2030 and how that will be achieved. It represents a commitment by the Government to invest in the future so that our defence force has the necessary capabilities to operate in a rapidly changing strategic environment. And most importantly, it provides a long-term plan for defence capability and capacity to promote a more secure Australia for Australians today and for the generations to come.
I congratulate the Minister for Defence, I congratulate the Department of Defence, I congratulate the Chief of the Defence Force, I congratulate individual service chiefs for they prepare great work, their great teamwork in preparing this Defence White Paper. Important work, critical work, vital work for the future of our nation, Australia. 


: Just a few concluding thoughts from me about how you can make a difference with the intelligent direction of Government stimulus on the one hand and also what happens on the ground in the local area on the other.
Just to look at some of the figures here for south western Sydney. South western Sydney, if you look at the Government's stimulus strategy, the economic stimulus strategy, we have now proposed investment of around $3 billion in south western Sydney with the range of national programs I referred to before.
They hit the ground here locally. That is, homes, pensioners, carers and professionals, with the investment in skills, the investment in social housing, the investment in energy insulation and other local government infrastructure projects.
That is a sizeable investment into this important part of Australia. And a few other examples  -  our friend in Punchbowl made reference to this in part just before - under stage one of the National School Pride Program, south western Sydney has received $46 million to maintain and upgrade 277 local schools.
That's happening now, as we speak. Work on these schools is due to commence this month.
Stage one funding will improve 225 social housing projects in south western Sydney totalling $60.5 million (inaudible) the problems of disability and ultimately the related problem of the availability of social housing. 6,878 social housing units in south western Sydney will receive much needed repairs and maintenance totalling $28.5 million. That is before you go to other road and rail infrastructure projects - Woodward Rd in Bankstown, half a million dollars, Picton Rd in (inaudible) half a million dollars, and a range of other, let's call them continuing investments by the Australian Government as well.
Take computers in schools, in south western Sydney, $19.77 million has provided 133 schools to purchase a total of 19,496 computers. Kingsgrove North High School, Kingsgrove High School will benefit from $1.729 million in the great Kingsgrove Trade Training Centre.
I know that is the seat of Watson.
The University of Western Sydney will receive $37.9 million in funding for capital works, Port Botany road and rail access and handling improvements - $150 million.
Why am I reading through this list? These are rolling out our investments over the last 12 months into this important part of Australia, in terms of continuing investment in school education, in higher education and as well as in much needed basic economic infrastructure.
And in addition to that, the specific investments which now flow from the school modernisation program, the investment in social housing as well as other local Government infrastructure projects.
That's $3 billion worth of additional investments.
What is the organising principle? The organising principle is, how do we support jobs and apprenticeships and training today, in building the infrastructure we need for tomorrow?
Today's unemployment numbers for Australia have fallen from 5.7 to 5.4 per cent.
And while unemployment will rise in Australia in the future, it does mean together we can make a difference by supporting jobs and apprenticeships today and building the infrastructure we need for tomorrow.
Thank-you for your participation in this roundtable with the community today.
This is just the opening session of a long Test match and therefore - given we are in Waugh country, I thought you would understand that analogy - frankly you are the team, you as representatives of the community organisation who may never have dealt with each other before, you as representatives of local businesses who have never dealt with each other before.
The ball is very much in your court. We are not just here to make a speech and make everyone feel better, that's not what we are on about.
We are here to make a difference. We have an employment coordinator, we have support now from Mission, we have a fund, a Local Jobs Fund. But the ideas, the initiative and the enterprise must now come from you.
Because if we can make a difference to number of lives, a number of families in this community, as a result our national family and our national community will much the better.
I thank you for your time.


[Acknowledgements]
We're here today to talk about one thing. And that one thing is jobs and how do we make a difference locally. I noticed before that it's been a long time between drinks since you last had a Prime Minister visit here. Say 13 years ago? I think I was a defeated candidate in the 1996 election 13 years ago. I'm (inaudible) last 13 years and that was pretty painful for us. But 13 years has been a long stretch of time.
This is an important part of the Australian family. This is an old, old part of Sydney, named after a distinguished botanist and a distinguished member of (inaudible). And this municipality is home to, the mayor tells me, 180,000 people. This is a large slice of our national family so what happens here locally matters nationally. What happens with families here matters nationally. What happens with community facilities here matters nationally because this is a large, large group of Australians of diverse backgrounds, part of our Australian family.
So when the problem of unemployment hits and hits communities like this, our job as the nation's Government is to be in there with you, in solidarity with this local community in order to make a difference. As I've said in other gatherings like this across the country, not to come and try and wave some magic wand and pretend that the Australian Government can say that the global economic recession will stop at the continental shelf and shall not cross the boundaries of the territorial limits of Australia but to be simply up front about the fact that what can instead do as an Australian Government is reduce its impact. To reduce the (inaudible). That's the practical challenge.
And in communities like this that I've spoken to in the last month or two, right across our nation - I started in the City of Casey in Melbourne, moving on to the northern and eastern suburbs of Adelaide, to the southern suburbs of Perth, to north-western Tasmania, where I spoke with the community of Ulverstone, yesterday in Campbelltown and today in Bankstown and tomorrow in Liverpool and also with visits still to make to other parts of the country as well where unemployment is hitting hardest - how do we as government, partner with you the community to make a difference? To make a difference locally. This is a very, very practical business, with a very, very practical set of questions.
Let me tell you a little bit about how we're approaching this as an Australian Government and what we're doing around the world, what we're doing nationally, what we hope to do in partnership with you here locally. I'm going to ask Toby Hall in a minute from Mission Australia to throw some ideas on the table as well about what may be working in local communities elsewhere to trigger our thinking about what might also be good to do here in addition to what is already being done.
This recession is global. And therefore the first response has to be how do we work together with the other largest economies in the world to make a difference globally? And that's why recently I attended the G20 Summit in London, that's why at that G20 Summit I worked with heads of government from around the world on core challenges. How do you provide enough stimulus into the global economy now to make a difference while the private sector is in retreat?
The good news out of London is that we agreed on a stimulus package globally of some $5 trillion to add to the overall size of the global economy while the private sector is in retreat and that makes a huge difference in terms of jobs.
Secondly we agreed, how do we actually establish a framework which is agreed between the largest economies in the world to restore the world's leading private banks to health because the restoration of private credit flows is so important to the vibrance of local communities and local businesses. And what happens with the world's largest banks is of direct relevance to the flow of private credit and the cost of private credit here in local communities across Australia and we agreed on an international framework to do that.
We also agreed to provide proper resources and funding and policy flexibility to the International Monetary Fund. A trillion dollars worth of resources. Why? We don't want to see a second round major shock reverberate across the global financial system without the IMF ready to handle that shock. Because if you don't have that in place what happens is it bounces straight back into the world's private banks which in turn affects the flow of credit and the cost of credit to the rest of the world's economies, including to businesses here in Australia, in Sydney and in South Western Sydney.
What we also agreed on was rules for the future of the financial system globally as well, so that we don't return to the sort of free market fundamentalism, the unfettered markets, the unrestrained greed that we saw aligned in financial markets causing this crisis in the first place. And we're working together on finalising rules for the future of the financial system worldwide as well. The risk and reward ratios as they apply within the world's largest financial institutions, the proper provision of what's called prudential or regulatory capital to make sure our banks are properly provisioned for the future around the world. And other similar measures.
And finally, drawing a line under protectionism. One big lesson from the 1930s - if you go out there and launch trade wars against each other, everyone suffers and as a result local recessions deepen, lengthen and more people are hurt and hurt harder.
These are the things we agreed upon as a gathering of the world's largest economies in London only a month or so ago and while it's not a perfect outcome it was probably the best outcome we've seen from a global gathering of economic leaders and political leaders at any time in modern economic history. Because what these leaders agreed is as follows: we the community of nations, the community of the largest economies in the world, the G20, recognise one core fact: we are all in this together. Every one of us. Whether it is the King of Saudi Arabia, the President of Communist China or the President of Capitalist America  -  we are all in this together and the actions of one will affect the actions of the other.
The second thing that we are engaged in and it's not just global action, but national action. Last October we took a number of fundamental decisions. We took a decision to guarantee each and every bank deposit in the country. Deposits held in credit unions and building societies because if we don't have confidence in the stability of the financial system then frankly everything else becomes second order. And that decision was fundamental, absolutely fundamental, the first time that any Government, any Australian Government in the history of this federation going back to 1901 has gone out and guaranteed everyone's bank deposits.
Had we not done so, the roll-on consequences for the Australian economy would have been horrific. We did so, it was the right thing to, subject to the usual array of criticism but the absolutely right thing to do given the circumstances we were confronted with at the time. And other related measures to ensure that our banks and our financial system remain in effective working order given that when you look around the rest of the world you see more than 30 of the world's largest banks go under or have to be bailed out. The stability of our financial system is fundamental and we've been head down, tail up in making sure that that stability continues and it's been challenging work.
But in addition to that we also invest in temporary economic stimulus in order to make sure that we, through direct investment in the economy, are helping to fill the gap that is left by private sector temporarily in retreat because of what's happened with the global recession. And that's why we make absolutely no apology at all for investing in a national economic stimulus strategy to build jobs and training today while investing in the nation building infrastructure we need for tomorrow. That's the strategy. Jobs, apprenticeships, traineeships today while building the infrastructure, the roads, the rail, the ports, the high speed broadband, the schools, the TAFEs and the universities that we need for tomorrow.
That's our strategy, that's what we're doing. We began with short term stimulus by providing assistance to pensioners and carers, veterans and to families in order to provide a shot in the arm to the one and half million plus Australians who work in the retail sector. Compare and contrast the retail sales figures we saw published yesterday with those in practically every other advanced economy in the world  -  you will see the difference. I take serious the jobs of Australians out there in the retail sector. That's why we did it without apology. It was the right thing to do and if you want to see some statistical evidence of its effect, look at those figures yesterday and compare them what is happening in other economies around the world. We can't prevent job losses occurring in the retail sector, we can reduce those job losses from what they would otherwise be. That's short term stimulus.
Medium term stimulus. Our investment in the single largest school modernisation program the country has ever seen. Every primary school in the country, secondary schools as well. A comprehensive maintenance and repair program across all of Australia's 10,000 schools. With one objective, to be out there injecting $15 billion of activity into the economy in the period ahead to create jobs, apprenticeships, traineeships now while building the schools that we want for our kids for tomorrow. 21st century state of the art libraries, multi-purpose halls, classroom modernisations. In the case of secondary schools, 21st century science centres, language centres to make sure that our kids have the absolute best facilities in which to learn. And on the way through creating jobs, creating opportunities and apprenticeships.
I was talking to a bloke yesterday, (inaudible) I was talking to a bloke yesterday. We visited a firm of builders on my return from a local jobs forum out in Campbelltown, where I just ran through the number of trades and sub-contractors involved in single building site, putting together a single 21st century library, or a multi-purpose hall in a primary school. He rattled off to me something in the order of 20 to 25 separate trades. People who do the site clearance at the beginning to the site clean up at the end and every point in between. From plasterers to tilers to painters, to people who do the brickwork, the carpentry, the joinery and everything in between. Some trades I'd never heard of before and all there providing jobs. And he said in a project like that up to 60 tradies and subcontractors could be on the site at any one time, rising in some cases to 150 and beyond. With those projects going up for six to nine months.
We're doing that right across the country. And we're doing it for one express purpose: jobs, apprenticeships, traineeships now in order to build the schools that we want for tomorrow. Similarly with social housing; the largest single investment in social and community housing that an Australian Government has ever engaged in. 20,000 units of social housing, out there being invested in now to create the social infrastructure we need for tomorrow while supporting jobs and apprenticeships today.
Our investment in ceiling insulation. Those folks out there involved in the ceiling insulation business at the moment have got more work than they can poke a stick at. Right across the country our objective, to assist the environment, to assist in pulling greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, reducing our greenhouse gas pollution to realising our national ambition to create in every owner-occupied dwelling in the country, a dwelling which has environmentally effective ceiling insulation. Pulling the equivalent of a huge amount of greenhouse gas equivalents out of the atmosphere, at the same times creating jobs and traineeships on the way through. These are the elements around medium term stimulus strategy.
For our long term stimulus strategy you've already seen our announcement to build a world class national broadband network. That's an investment of up to $43 billion across the country. To create the information super highway of the 21st century so that businesses out here in Bankstown and south-western Sydney are on the same playing field as businesses in any other part of the country, able to jump on the information super highway, establish real time contact with customer bases and client bases across the country and across the world, which have not been accessible in the past and also accessing the most cost effective supply chains that those businesses might not have been able to access before as well.
And to turbo charge the way in which business does business and the way in which communities have government services delivered in health, in education. Schools in one part of the country hooking up with the best teachers in other parts of the country. You have a great lecturer in Japanese language studies located in Brisbane delivering a course online to the local school here in Bankstown. At the same time we have got a first class teacher of a particular area of matriculation level physics, online, teaching a bunch of kids in a provincial school somewhere in south western Queensland.
That is what we are on about. The best way to do it. In health as well, making sure that the radiography services, your scans for expectant mums, can be accessed online around the country for people who don't have immediate access to first class, immediately physically available hospital facilities.
So what are we doing? Creating jobs, apprenticeships and traineeship opportunities now in the building industry, while at the same time, creating infrastructure that economy and our communities need for the 21st Century.
This is our national program of action, but none of that works properly unless we are also engaged in a program of local action as well. And what I outlined in my first address to local communities like this about a month ago in the City of Casey in Melbourne was a Jobs and Training Compact with Australia.
And the Jobs and Training Compact with Australia is in a nutshell this: how do we make a difference here at the local level as well, how do we make a difference with local communities. What is our Jobs and Training Compact with Australia all about? Three things: A compact with young Australians so that every young Australian under the age of 25 must be earning or learning and provided a universal entitlement to a training place if that young person is not in school or is not in work.
That is what we are on about and we intend to do it, in order to provide the skills that a young person needs now, particularly if they are finding it difficult to get in to the labour market or have lost their job, to obtain new skills, to sustain their current skills or to enhance them, so that when the global economy recovers, they are in the best position possible to re-enter the workforce.
We don't want to repeat the mistakes of the past and have a generation of young people who find it very difficult to re-enter the workforce.
Second thing: a compact with Australians who have been retrenched through no fault of their own, providing an undertaking to workers in those circumstances, that we will be with them through the changes that we have made to NewStart, the changes that we have made to availability of services from Job Services Australia and the changes that we have also engineered in our discussions with the banks to make it easier for people who have been retrenched to get a year's grace in terms of mortgage repayments and personal loan repayments on things like cars.
Practical things which make a difference. It doesn't solve the problem, being retrenched is really hard, but in order to try and lessen the burden, lessen the impact, these are practical measures we can take, and there is more to be done here, in a compact with Australians who have been retrenched.
Thirdly: a compact with local communities, which brings us to the meat in the sandwich about what we are doing here today.
How can we partner with you as representatives of local business, local chambers of commerce, local community organisations, church organisations, charitable organisations, local representatives of the trade union movement, how can we work together with you in order to take all those things that we are doing nationally, add something and make more of a difference here locally.
That is what it's all about. We have established this thing called a Local Jobs Fund, $650 million nationwide, and we are seeking to deliver that in partnership with local communities through our local priority employment coordinators.
Now Zvia here has been handed this task by the minister and she will be your interim priority employment coordinator and the job which we will leave with her and the minister as I leave here today is to establish a network with you, the representatives of this community, you the leaders of this community, on how we can make difference here locally.
I am not going to tell you what you should do. We are here to listen to what you think you can do, what difference you can make.
If there are local social enterprises, or a local not for profit organisation which can be established, or expanded from what it currently does, how can we build on that in terms of creating more jobs, more apprenticeships, more training opportunities?
These are local business proposals in partnership with other businesses where the Government can help. Do your local authorities here have further additional local initiatives which we can partner up with and make a difference? You all know, because you live here, you love this place, you are part and parcel of the community. You know it well. You all know what is possible. Our job is not just to say well here is a bunch of fine ideas and just walk away. Our job is to partner with you through the presence of a Priority Employment Coordinator and we're keen to support her, working in partnership with your local members and on top that having access also to this Local Jobs Fund. And that's the challenge we're going to leave you with this morning.
One final and practical thing before I ask Toby to speak is this. If you want some evidence of the sorts of things we're doing locally, today I I'm also pleased to announce today that the Government will be providing $3.15 million towards the redevelopment of the Bankstown Arts Centre in South Western Sydney. I'll be visiting there later today. Why are we doing that? We're funding more than half of the $5.9 million for the project, the centre is expected to include a theatre, rehearsal rooms, foyer and exhibition space, studio, meeting rooms, storage, administration areas, as well as landscaped and paved grounds and car parking.
This will involve local jobs, about 40 in number during the construction phase and involve also the participation of community organisations and volunteers groups in support of its completion. It also builds on more than $770,000 that the Government has delivered for 19 local projects in Bankstown this year  -  bringing the Government's investment this year alone to nearly $4 million in these local projects.
None of these projects individually fixes the problem but if we're engaged in of all of these things together and adding some, with you coming up with ideas, local community, local organisations and business organisations saying hey we can do these extra things as well if you're partners with us, we can make a power of difference, make a huge difference locally. And being realistic about it, not eliminating the problems of unemployment, not eliminating it but reducing it and that is what we're here to do.
Thanks for listening.


The purpose of our gathering today, as it has been in the last couple of days here in South Western Sydney, is very, very simple and very straightforward and very hard at the same time. And that is, how do we make a difference with unemployment here in the local area.
How many of you up there have been to forums I have conducted over the last few days? How many of you are here for the first time? It is pretty useful to know, given those who have been exposed to the sort of talks I have conveyed to local communities in recent days and who is here with us for the first time.
The challenge we all face is a very practical one. And in part it was underlined by the release of the national unemployment data yesterday. There is a global recession. It is washing across every single economy in the world, developed and developing.
The Western world, the Muslim world, Asia, Latin America, you name it. Every country, every economy is wrestling with the same challenge right now. Therefore, the challenge which each national government faces is how do we make a difference in terms of the impact of that recession on our nation, on our state, on our community.
What we have done locally also needs to be reinforced by what we do nationally and globally. Globally and for those of you who have not heard me speak on this in the last couple of days, our action has been primarily focussed through the work of the G20.
What does that mean out here in Liverpool? It means a lot. Ask yourself this very simple question. If you are a small business out here in Liverpool and if you want to get credit from your bank to do something, where does your bank get its credit from?
That bank gets its credit often through the way in which it raises funds offshore, through the international banking system. What's gone wrong in the international banking system? The international banking system, because of the unfettered, unrestrained greed operating in underegulated financial markets in recent years, has contracted the supply of credit available to the international banking system, which means that the globally significant banks, many of them, have either fallen over or reduced their credit operations worldwide.
Reducing credit operations worldwide, guess what, we are part of the world. And the result of that, there's a reduced credit flow to the Australian banks and as a result of that, the cost of credit and the availability of credit, the lifeline, the artery of the global market system, the artery therefore also of the Australian economy becomes constricted.
So people ask, what does it matter what is going on overseas and what is happening in global financial markets and what the G20 is seeking to do in response to those developments? It's very very very local.
What we do globally effects what happens here locally when it comes to the interconnectedness of the global financial system. And that's why we have been head down, tail up, engaging in everything we can do, sleeves rolled up, in bringing about the best outcomes possible through the deliberations of the G20, the Group of 20 largest economies in the world.
We had some success at that London Summit on temporary injection of stimulus to the global economy, on the proper provision of resources to the International Monetary Fund to deal with future shocks; on restoring the world's biggest banks to health through the removal of toxic assets, through the recapitalisation of those banks; through new rules to the global financial system for the future so we don't make the same mistakes as we have in the past; and through drawing a line under the outbreak of global protectionism that destroys economic recovery worldwide.
But there is more work to be done globally. The work done in London was good and solid work. And we were in there, on Australia's behalf, doing our bit.
The second part of our strategy is what we do nationally. And I go back to those unemployment figures yesterday. Unemployment in the future in Australia is going to go up. The fact that we're able to see the figures come down, yesterday's figures, is welcome news.
But we've got to be very realistic about the problems we face ahead. But what those figures remind us of is this: what we do nationally matters. It can reduce the problem. It can have a real effect. That is what economic stimulus is all about. That is why we are out there injecting and investing capital into the economy at a time when the private sector is in retreat. We are doing it deliberately, consciously and without apology, in order to make a difference.
And if you look at the quantum of what we are investing in the national economy, the State economy and here in south western Sydney, billions of dollars here in south western Sydney, it is to make a difference. It is to make a difference to local business, to make a difference to local jobs, to make a difference to local apprenticeships.
That is what it is all about. What is the organising principle for our national stimulus strategy? It is this: to invest in the infrastructure which we need for tomorrow, and in doing so supporting the jobs and apprenticeships we need for today.
That's it in a nutshell. Whether it is the school modernisation program, the largest single investment in the modernisation of our schools that the country has ever seen, whether it's our investment in social housing, our investment in energy insulation, whether it is through the roll-out of the national broadband network, there is a core organising principle.
Creating, and or supporting, jobs apprenticeships and training now, today, while building the nation building infrastructure we need for tomorrow.
You see, that is the stark alternative that we have right now. Our plan is very clear. Our plan is, we can make a difference to support jobs and apprenticeships today by investing in the infrastructure we need for tomorrow. And the alternative plan, the Liberals' plan, I have got to say, is to slash and burn - $100 billion cut from the budget, cutting hospitals, cutting education and thereby deepening the recession and throwing more people on the unemployment queue.
That's the alternative we are looking at here. And therefore I believe that for the nation, it's a very clear cut choice of which we have to go in the future.
Which brings us down to what we are doing here locally. The programs I have described just now, global action and national action. That's all good, important and necessary. And were it not for the injection of extra activity in the economy through our national economic stimulus strategy, then the pace of activity in our economy now would be even slower than it is, and unemployment would be higher than it is.
But our purpose in being here today is to engage with you as the local community, here in Liverpool, about how we can make a further difference, how we can make it better than it would otherwise be through global action.
Some time ago, a month or so ago, I launched this thing called a Jobs and Training Compact with Australia. It is designed to meet our current circumstances. It involves three parts.
Firstly a compact with young Australians which very simply is this: every Australian under the age of 25, this Government expects you to be either earning or learning, full stop. And unemployment benefits are being tailored and made conditional accordingly.
Our part of the compact, our part of the deal with young Australians is to make sure there's a universal entitlement to a training place if they're not in work or in school. That's what we are on about.
And the organising principle there is to make sure that our young people, challenged by what is happening with the global recession, do not become unemployable in the future.
We want them to be able to use this period of down time in order to obtain new skills, sustain their current skills or further develop a whole range of additional skills on top of what they have already got. For one purpose, so that when the global economic recovery comes, they are there to add to productivity, to our business needs, and of course to provide for their families and themselves.
That's our compact with young Australians.
Our compact with retrenched Australians is also important. It is about the business of how do we actually deal with the challenge of those who have been retrenched through no fault of their own.
Now if you look across the country right now, many business are under great stress and a number of workers have been retrenched and some workers still will be retrenched. The compact with retrenched Australians is very important too.
What is the first thing on the mind of someone who has just been retrenched  -  can I pay my mortgage, and can I continue to pay off my car. Very basic questions.
That is one of the reasons why the Government sat down about a month or so ago with the major banks and said, what deal can you do with them to make a difference. And the agreement we reached with the major banks is for a much greater approach of flexibility, the possibility of deferring people's mortgage payments for a year and car loan repayments for a year.
Now the banks have formed that agreement with us. They put it out there in black and white. We will be watching carefully how it is operational. But it is an important level of support, at a very practical level that we can provide families who are faced with that very practical question, the bread winner is losing his or her job, what can we do to pay the mortgage, what can we do to pay off the car.
Because if you don't have a car, it is really hard to get around in terms of accessing other things which you and your family need.
Other things that we have done for retrenched Australians are making it easier to obtain Newstart and also making it easier to access the services provided by Job Services Australia. But there is more to be done here.
The third pillar of our Jobs and Training Compact with the nation though is this: a compact with local communities, and that is why I have spent the last three days in south western Sydney.
I am told yesterday, at Bankstown it was the first visit by an Australian Prime Minister in 13 years. I don't know what my predecessor had been up to but obviously Bankstown was not on the agenda (inaudible).
But spending yesterday in Bankstown, the day before in Campbelltown and today here in Liverpool, there is one purpose in this which is how do we build this third pillar to the Jobs and Training Compact with the nation - the compact with local communities.
What does it mean, (inaudible) bunch of words. And I'm not much interested in words for their own sake, I'm interested in what we do.
It is this: right now the Minister for Local Government is out there announcing $800 million worth of local projects right across the country, making a difference in every community.
And Minto on Wednesday and yesterday in Bankstown, we made a couple of those announcements and there are announcements like that right across the country. And the organising principle again is this: jobs and apprenticeships today while building the economic and community infrastructure we need for tomorrow.
That's it in a nutshell. But reinforcing that, the Australian Government has also established a Local Jobs Fund with $650 million nationwide. And it is there to reinforce the presence of local priority employment coordinators, funded by us.
This is where the challenging bit comes. How do we work with you, the local community here, to make a difference, accessing that fund, with projects which make a difference in jobs and apprenticeships and training and projects which make a real difference in building some of the community assets you need for the next three, five, seven nine years.
How do we do that together? And when I say together, I mean together. That is that that we all as a global community (inaudible)? How are you going to partner with us? How is the local authority going to partner with us and have investment with us? How is the local chamber of commerce going to partner with us, how are local businesses going to partner with us?
How is the local community organisation going to partner with us? How are local civic leaders going to partner with us personally and how are local pillars of the community  -  and you would know who they are in this part of the world - going to partner with us to make this possible?
Rather than this being some sort of top down iniative, we need this to be a bottom up approach because the best ideas could be had locally. You know your community, you love your community and that is why you are here living this community and working in it.
Our job is to be here and say to you in loud and clear cut terms, we want to be partners with you. And that is why we have a priority employment coordinator, that's Zvia, please stand up. And Zvia here will be our coordinator of this area for the period ahead.
And she will have access to this $650 million Local Jobs Fund. She will work with the team which will be supported by Brendan, the Minister (inaudible) But you know, nothing will happen unless you come and join us to make it work.
And that is what I am here to do today, to listen to your ideas.
One other thing I would like to announce today is that the Government has committed $33.7 million over three years to expand and enhance the Australian Apprenticeships Access program.
Specifically, the Government will invest $3.5 million to fund 1,850 more places for pre-vocational training and support for retrenched employees aged 25 and over, facing barriers to employment in the year ahead.
This is in addition to the $30 million that we announced in early March for an additional 3,650 pre-vocational training and support places for vulnerable young job seekers aged 19 - 24.
Through this a young person or a retrenched worker can do a minimum of 150 hours of pre-vocational training plus 13 weeks of job search assistance, plus ongoing help once they are in a job. The training could include basic training which would involve retail, construction, (inaudible) or an apprenticeship or some other form of training.
I am happy to say that all access program brokers who operate in western Sydney have indicated their willingness to meet with community organisations such as Punchbowl Boys High and Canterbury (inaudible) for possible partnerships.
This is the practical stuff.
One of the things that we have encountered in our discussions with groups in Bankstown and Campbelltown and elsewhere is, what do you do in terms of pre-vocational training?
What do you do with people who are not quite up to a TAFE course or not quite up to going into an apprenticeship? What have we got that can flexibly be applied in this circumstances, both for the under 25s and over 25s as well. That is where this particular program comes from.
But nationally it is just a figure. Locally however, the challenge is to make it work and to apply it to people who can make proper use of it in local jobs, local infrastructure, local pre-apprenticeships, local apprenticeships, local training, local pre-training.
That is what we are on about, with one end point - when we look back in a few years time, how did we in 2009 make a difference? How did we take the unemployment rate down in this part of the world, which has already risen, I am advised to something in the order of 8.6 per cent in March, it has gone up 3.5 per cent, 50 per cent higher than the national average.
How do we take that number and make it better? How do we bring it down a point or two? And by doing this sort of work locally, we can have that effect. And by doing this sort of work locally, you know something, there's something enormously empowering about a community working together as well, to make a difference.
But enough from me, and I'm about to turn it over to you.


It's great to be back in Wollongong, great to be back in the Illawarra and thank you all for coming out to talk with us today.
To Sharon Bird, the member for Cunningham, Jennie George the member for Throsby, Brendan O'Connor, the Minister for Employment Participation, Jason Clare the Member for Blaxland, David Farmer, City Council General Manager, state ministers, state parliamentary colleagues, local councillors, ladies and gentlemen. And those of you have a passion for this region and its future.
That's why we are here, to talk about that and see what together we can do about that, given the extraordinary circumstances which the global economy has presented to us all.
I've just come with Sharon and with Jennie from BlueScope and good news today, we the Australian Government announced that the air warfare destroyers, the steel which will be necessary for their construction, will be provided by BlueScope.
Australian warships, made in Australia, with Australian steel and made here, in this, your local community. Good for the nation, good for the Illawarra, good for Australia's defence, good for the Navy. But you know what was great about the story of BlueScope is that they won that contract with the Royal Australian Navy against world competition because BlueScope are world class and they beat all comers from around the world.
This will be a very important project. They are rolling out thousands of tonnes of quality steel for those ships as they come off the line. These will be called a Hobart Class of destroyers.
The two previous HMAS Hobarts were not built in Australia - one laid in the '30s in the United Kingdom, the other laid down I think in the '60s in the United States.
The first HMAS Hobart to be manufactured, built, constructed here in Australia and using Australian steel. Good story.
We are here today to talk about jobs, right now. And what we do to confront the challenges which we are confronted with from this global recession. As I look here in the local area, the jobless rate in the Illawarra has jumped to 8.3 and the rate for Wollongong even higher at 9.1.
And my attitude to these sorts of challenges is very, very basic. The global recession is not discriminating against, or between I should say, countries or economies or between industries. It is affecting all countries, all economies, all industries, at the same time, everywhere in the world. 
That's why this is such a fundamental problem and challenge for all of us. But the message also for the countries and economies of the world, but also our national response here in Australia, is a very basic principle.
It is as follows: we are all in this together, each and every one of us. It doesn't matter where you come from in Australia, what level of government, whether you are from the state government, federal government, local authorities, whether you are from beyond government, working in the key businesses of this region, or whether you are working in the unions.
Whether you are from the church sector, the community sector, the charitable sector, the not-for-profit sector, out there at the coal face helping people who need help because of the impact of this recession on unemployment, and its impact therefore on people's lives and their ability to get through the day and the week and the month ahead.
Or whether you are from our great local university, the University of Wollongong. We are all in this together. And together you can make a difference.
There is no point standing up here as a political leader and saying, ‘you can stop the global recession, it will happen tomorrow morning at 1.45 AM'. I mean it is just nonsense.
Because the factors at work in this global recession to do with unrestrained greed and unregulated financial markets across the world have caused consequences for real working people everywhere.
Now the practical response, and the practical responsibility is to say, how can we take this thing, how can we take its impact on unemployment and how can we reduce it, how can we cushion the blow. How can we take those unemployment numbers for this region and make them a bit less. How can we make that possible.
And for those for whom unemployment is a reality, how do we make that experience of unemployment somewhat better in terms of training opportunities, or in terms of the decency of support we provide as a local and national community for people who lose their jobs for no fault of their own.
So what we're here to talk about today is briefly to tell you what we've been doing globally, briefly to tell you about what we're doing nationally, to talk about the framework we're seeking to apply locally and then to hear from you about what you can do in partnership with us to make those numbers on unemployment better than they would otherwise be here in the Illawarra.
As you know, we are in the worst recession, the worst global recession since the Great Depression. This is the worst set of global economic circumstances in three quarters of a century. That makes the challenge before us even greater.
Treasury's advice to be published in the Budget tomorrow is that the measures that we have put in place will support Australian jobs and significantly reduce the length of the Australian unemployment queues. This Treasury advice finds that if the Government had done nothing, national unemployment in Australia would have been forecast to reach 10 per cent.
However, due to Government action, unemployment forecasts for the country in tomorrow's Budget will be significantly lower. This Treasury analysis calculates the stark human cost of doing nothing.
This advice is the final nail in the coffin for those who argue that governments should do nothing to support jobs during a global recession. That is why tomorrow's Budget will support the jobs of today by investing in the infrastructure we need for tomorrow.
I said before that we are embarked on a program of global action, national action and local action. The causes of the global recession by definition lie beyond our shores. The good news is that we've been working together in partnership with the governments of the world to bring about a coordinated global response.
Australia does so through the G20, the group of 20 major industrial economies in the world. And that's the meeting which I attended and represented Australia at in London most recently and Washington at the end of last year.
The good news is this: governments around the world, whether it's communist China, capitalist America or the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, all have concluded that unless we act together then the consequences for us all will be disastrous.
That's why they agreed on an unprecedented $5 trillion investment in global economic stimulus; that's a large number when you consider that total global production each year is about $63 trillion, involving all the economies in the world.
They agreed to provide proper resources to the International Monetary Fund to guard against any future systemic collapse in the banking system, $1 trillion investment in the IMF guarding against future problems in fundamental financial institutions of regional and prospectively global significance in places like Central and Eastern Europe.
We also acted together to ensure that we would develop and agree a common framework for what's called toxic asset management. That is, restoring the world's major private banks to health, stripping them of toxic assets, recapitalising those banks in a globally consistent fashion so that private credit flows can commence again.
Because until that occurs, frankly, stimulus only can do so much. You need a restoration of normal credit flows, at normal prices through banks across the world in order for the private economy and the jobs that it generates to come back to normal.
We also agreed that we need to reform the rules for the financial system for the future. These days of unrestrained greed and unregulated financial markets, unfettered free markets, have come to a close. We actually need proper regulation. We need a proper balance in the way in which we do these things in the future.
And whether it's to do with prudential standards, other regulatory standards, the role of credit rating agencies and the rest, these now have formed a core part of the ongoing regulatory work of the Financial Stability Forum, commissioned by the G20 heads of government and reporting progressively in the months and years ahead. Step by step, inch by inch, returning to a properly regulated financial market worldwide.
And finally drawing a line under global protectionism. Those of you who are school students among us may have studied at school the history of the Great Depression, and what happened in the 1930s.
One of the things that happened in the 1930s is that the governments around the world got together and they failed to agree. There was a very important conference in London in 1933 where in fact they got together, decided there was a huge problem, and then had a barney.
That didn't get us very far. What it did is it actually deepened and lengthened the recession. Because what happened is they all then began to resort to acts of national protectionism, one against the other, which then contracted the size of the global market, contracted export markets for everyone else and the jobs depending on those exports.
People need to bear that in mind in the debate today as well. But the good news out of London is that all those Governments and all those economies representing 85 per cent of the global economy - the 20 of them together - decided to draw a line under that and not to engage in protectionist actions inconsistent with their legal obligations to the World Trade Organisation.
That's a few words about what work we have been doing together globally. Nationally, you will be familiar with what we have done.
Firstly, stabilising our financial markets, providing a guarantee to each and every depositor in an Australian financial institution. That is, a bank, a credit union, a building society. Something we did last October, never done before by an Australian Government in the history of the Commonwealth, absolutely necessary to underpin confidence and stability in the Australian financial system.
On top of that we've been engaged in an economic stimulus strategy designed to fill the gap to the greatest extent possible in our economy, while the private sector is in retreat, because of what's happening in private credit markets around the world and the contraction of global demand.
So what have we been doing? Firstly, short term stimulus, payments to pensioners, carers, families, to provide support for the 1.5 million Australians who work in Australia's retail sector. That is about 15 per cent of our workforce, really important stuff.
Secondly, medium term stimulus, by investing in the biggest school modernisation program the country has ever seen. The flow through here in terms of projects which have been launched in this local area in recent times, I was talking to both Jennie and Sharon about that just before. Good stuff.
State of the art 21st century libraries popping up in local primary schools, multipurpose halls, classroom modernisation, secondary schools able to compete for state of the art science centres and language centres.
And guess what, it is not just here. In every one of the 7,500 primary schools across our country, our unapologetic ambition is to turn it into a construction site for the next year or two ahead.
And the reason is, building jobs, apprenticeships and traineeships today while constructing the infrastructure we need for tomorrow. So that we have got the best schools and the best learning environment for our kids for the future.
(Applause)
There must be a principal up the back there. (Laughter) I hope a lot goes to your school sir.
Secondly, the social housing. It is just wrong that we have got in this country today such high numbers of people who are homeless according to the Census data. How do we make a difference? Well, you are about to see the biggest single national investment in social housing the country has ever seen - 20,000 units of social housing being built right across the country.
What are we doing? Creating jobs, apprenticeships and traineeship opportunities today while building the social infrastructure we need for tomorrow, to bring down that level of homelessness.
Similarly, we have got a $4 billion investment in energy efficiency, what is our objective? To ensure that every owner occupied dwelling in the country has ceiling insulation in order to create job opportunities today and bring down greenhouse gas emissions for tomorrow.
That is our overarching principle. That is medium term stimulus.
Longer term stimulus you have seen us already announce one large project which is a National Broadband Network. We are serious about this. How can we be in 21st century Australia and have a broadband network which is one of the slowest, least accessible, and most expensive anywhere in the western world?
It's just wrong, it's retarding growth. If you're a small business operating in the Illawarra, why shouldn't you have the access to at least 100 megabytes per second to link you up with customers right around the world, at speed, or to a new supply chain for the businesses which you operate?
If you're teaching out at the University of Wollongong, why shouldn't you have access to at-speed, maximum bandwidth, maximum band speed to the delivery of your courses to anywhere and everywhere without impediment? 
And similarly, why can't you be using that platform to do so with the delivery of courses right around the world?
I am sure they are doing so at present, but this bandwidth and band speed that we provide simply turbocharges that, makes the platforms for delivery much better and much more efficient, much more rapid and makes it therefore more possible and more profitable.
Delivering e-health services. If you're dependent on health services from one of the big teaching hospitals in Sydney, how do we get that down the tube to you in the local GP clinic? Well, we need bandwidth in order to do that.
Similarly with our schools, similar to the way in which governments can put services online. We don't have the platform to do that.
Twelve years our predecessors were in office and I can't find any evidence of our national broadband network being built anywhere. I just can't. It's time to get on with it.
What again is the organising principle concerning our challenge for this great global recession? It's creating jobs, apprenticeships and traineeships now with an investment of up to $43 billion in building a National Broadband Network and creating the infrastructure, the nation building infrastructure we need for our businesses and for our health system and for our education system for tomorrow - that's the organising principle.
I talked about global action, national action; let's talk a little bit about local action. Here in this local area we have been injecting quite a lot of activity.
If I looked at the figures that I was handed before, and have carefully now left behind in my other folder - I stand to be corrected on these numbers therefore - we're injecting something like, through the National Stimulus Strategy, $633 million into this regional economy, the Illawarra. That is a lot of investment.
I was asked just before at the press conference ‘what are you doing in terms of infrastructure?', to which my answer was $374 million. That's actually quite a sizeable answer to that question.
If you go through what's happening in schools, what's happening with social housing and the local application of what I have just been describing, this is all being funnelled through to what is happening on the ground here. So that if you're a tradie, if you're a sparkie, if you're a person that is working in 20 to 25 separate trades, then you have got an opportunity to get access to jobs which are going to crop up through these local building programs operating in local schools.
That's why we are doing it. That's the difference, so whether it's in the schools, whether it's what we are rolling out in terms of the roads system, whether it's what we are doing as far as our TAFE and our universities as well.
The members reminded me this morning about the injection that we have just made in the University of Wollongong, some $38 million into a state of the art infrastructure planning facility. This is a really good investment in your local economy.
So what I have just been describing nationally flows through locally to the tune of $633 million. That is investment which would not otherwise be in this regional economy had this government not decided to step up to the plate and say there is a global recession on, how can we make a difference
And I simply again repeat the question, had we not done so, unemployment queues in this country would be much, much worse. Look at the international data. For what we achieved in terms of the unemployment data which was released just last week, one of the few economies in the world, at least for that month, which has shown unemployment come down a notch. Of course it will go up in the future, but what we are determined to do is to act globally, nationally and locally to reduce the problem to the greatest extent possible.
Of course here in the local area, there have been a number of job cuts and we know that we are going to have to act even more decisively in what we do locally in order to make further of a difference.
Of course another area in which we seek to make differences is what we do in the area of planning and in the area of apprenticeships and traineeships. Jennie for example has chaired the Illawarra Apprenticeship Pilot Program that's aimed at disadvantaged unemployed people and that has helped over 400 young people in this region through a pre-vocational course and into an apprenticeship with local business.
That's good local practical work. It's an example of how a government can work together along with businesses and local unions with the Commonwealth funding a coordinator for the project, the State Government funding a range of pre-vocational courses and the Illawarra Business Chamber now carrying the program forward. Good local practical work.
Jennie has also been involved with the Beacon Foundation's No Dole program in six local schools in the Shellharbour area. This is a program in which year 9 and 10 students make a public commitment to stay in education, training or employment with support from the local community and local businesses. It's consistent with what we are now doing nationally. Our approach for anyone under 25 is summed up in a single phrase; you are either earning or learning.
We are making a universal entitlement of an educational training place for anyone under the age of 25. Whether it's at universities, whether it's at TAFEs or whether it's at school. Because we need to make sure that our young people in this time of global economic downturn are seizing this opportunity to take those skills, to take them to a different level with a new set of skills. To enhance what they've got, so that when the global economic recovery comes they are in harness and ready to go. And I would commend Jennie on her local work in these areas
Also on the local front, we intend today to do some work with our local employment coordinators. And today we have with us Linda Mortimer. Where is Linda? This is Linda Mortimer. She is now your Local Employment Coordinator, for the period immediately ahead.
What is all this about? What we have done nationwide is look at those regions of Australia where unemployment is tipping up fastest and hardest. It's not just here, it's other parts of Australia as well. Last week I spent three days in south western Sydney , in Liverpool, in Bankstown and in Campbelltown. Talking to groups such as this about we can make a difference on the ground. Prior to that I was at similar meetings in the City of Casey in Melbourne, in Ulverstone in north western Tasmania. In the city of Mawson Lakes I think in the north western suburbs of Adelaide and then of course in the City of Stirling in the southern part of Perth on the way to Fremantle.
The challenges in these communities are similar and the reason I am coming out to speak with each of these communities is with one simple question - ‘How can we make a further difference locally?' We have appointed Priority Employment Coordinators in each of these regions. Secondly we're backing them up with the Local Jobs Fund of some $650 million. And we need to make sure that she is able to draw upon local good ideas about what we can do here locally to make even more of a difference.
But you know something? It won't work unless you the community pile in with your ideas, with your suggestions and wherever possible, with your co-investment of talent, time and where possible cash. We want to be partners with you. What I know from my own experiences in government is that these things work best when locals come up with an idea, get in there with you in a partnership and see it through.
My experience of having worked in Canberra as Prime Minister for a little more than a year now, is that not all wisdom proceeds from Parliament House Canberra. You may be surprised to learn that. I've discovered it quite recently. Not exactly.
But you know stuff works if you the community, who know your community, you're passionate about community, you love living here, that's why you're here. You have therefore got a deep emotional and practical engagement about how you can take what is currently on offer in this community and make it better. And that's what we are here to do, to be partners with you.
So we want to see social enterprise initiatives, we want to see good local business initiatives, we want to see what the local chamber of commerce has to say and to suggest, we want to see what your not-for-profits have to say and suggest.
And so when I turn this discussion over to your contributions soon, it is with an idea of harnessing your best positive ideas about ‘here we are now, what can we do in the immediate term to make it better'.
It's not just an open discussion which leads nowhere, no one has got time for that. You're all busy people and so are we. That's we have a Priority Employment Coordinator, that's why we have allocated $650 million to a national fund to support activities in local areas. But we won't do that unless you come forward with stuff which is actually going to work and have an effect.
How can you build your local social infrastructure? How can you build local micro-businesses? How do people who are currently out there unemployed who might be able to assist, into running their own enterprises? How can we got out there and augment some of the programs already being supported by the University of Wollongong?
How can we augment some of the good project work being done by BlueScope? How can we augment what is being done by your local authorities in this area? How can we build up jobs, apprenticeship and traineeships?
One final thought from me, before we go to your contributions from the floor.
And it goes to how we go to about planning for our infrastructure long term. I have spoken about national action, I have spoken about global action, I have spoken about local action. But also the whole question of how we plan better for our cities in the future.
And when I was recently in Hobart at our meeting of the Council of Australian Governments, bringing together all the Premiers and the Chief Ministers and myself and their treasurers, one of the things that we were discussing is how do we make sure that our major metropolitan centres are planned best for the future.
Our major cities must have better planning for the future so that we can plan better for their infrastructure for the long term. Our capital cities must have the best planning possible for the long term, including for the provision of infrastructure.
For example in NSW, Sydney must have better planning for the future - better metropolitan planning arrangements will help ensure consistent decision making, improve the efficiency of infrastructure investment and further contribute to productivity and economic growth.
If we do that, it means that infrastructure would be better planned, better connected: our roads; our railways; our ports; our airports; energy; water; broadband; universities; hospitals. We need to be planning better.
It would make certainly Sydney work much better. It would make it easier to get around between work, home and the shops. I know we have got to do better when it comes to the planning of our major cities, our capital cities in particular.
That's why in April I charged the Council of Australian Governments with tackling this challenge for the future. From my own experience in government, I know for example that Sydney's planning arrangements must include better coordination between all levels of government.
I understand this, which is why last year when we came to government we established the Major Cities Unit inside the Commonwealth Government. And I believe that the federal sphere of government does have a role to play in shaping our major cities and our capital cities in the future.
Big cities like Sydney may need an overarching body responsible for long term planning and infrastructure.
So how can we go about making all this work? We've used before the great planning and success stories for our nation and for this state and for the city of Sydney itself, during the Sydney Olympics.
SOCOG, the Sydney Organising Committee for the Olympic Games, had three levels of Australian government and bipartisan representation and structure. How do we best deploy the best business brains, the best industry brains, the best brains from across the entire community to make that bipartisan mission best for the future?
I think it is time for us all to work together on the planning challenges which lie ahead for the future - for our major cities, for our capital cities, but in particular, for Australia's principal international gateway, Sydney.
Finally, on a very local point, I also spoke, I have been speaking with Sharon and the other local members about the delivery of Medicare services here in this community as well.
Jennie has reminded me to mention one matter of special interest to people in Warrawong. At the last election, we undertook that Warrawong residents would have better access to Government services. Ahead of tomorrow night's Budget I confirm that we are going to meet that commitment.
From January the 1st 2010, Medicare Australia services such as claiming Medicare rebates will be available from the existing Warrawong Centrelink office in the King Street shopping centre. And this is a precursor to a purpose-built centre for both Medicare and Centrelink offices.
As you as members of this local community, can I say we have a long hard road ahead of us, but you are a tough people down here. You have been through difficult times in the past and I believe in partnership with you and your passion for this community, we are going to achieve great things together in the future.
I conclude with where I began. The thing for us all to remember as we confront the reality of this global economic recession is that we are all in this together.
And if we tackle this thing together, with compassion and some commitment and some practical commonsense, with positive ideas on what can bring us together and make a difference for the local community, it is far better than simply having an acrimonious debate about those things which might divide us.
So the forum is very much now open to you.


This Government unapologetically is in the building business and the reason for that is as follows. We are committed to supporting jobs, small business and apprenticeships today by investing in the infrastructure our nation needs for tomorrow. Investing in rail, in road, in ports, investing in school modernisation, in our hospitals, investing in solar energy, investing in the things that will make a difference for the future. 
We are currently also investing in the single biggest school modernisation program Australia has ever seen. And the whole purpose is this: supporting jobs, apprenticeships and small business today while investing in the rail, the road, the ports, the broadband we need for tomorrow.
The practicality of it now confronts us. Rolling up our sleeves and getting on with projects like this. This is a good project. What we're investing in here is more than a billion dollars in the Australian rail freight corporation nationwide to make sure than we are boosting the productivity of this economy.
Look at this project here - $135 million to put in a third track which will have the result of increasing by about one third the amount of coal that we can get through to the Port of Newcastle. That's practical stuff. The federal Government in the past said ‘all too hard, not our problem, go away'. We've decided to roll up our sleeves and do something about it and it's happening. That's what is happening behind us. Making a difference with jobs and small business and apprenticeships now while adding to the rail infrastructure our economy needs for tomorrow.
Secondly, we're here today also to announce our joint funding, our joint investment in what will become the Hunter Valley Expressway. This is a $1.65 billion project where the Premier of NSW and the Australian Government are joint investors. This will be a good project as well. Investing in jobs, in business and in apprenticeships today while supporting the road infrastructure our community and our nation need for the future.
This particular road project, the Hunter Valley expressway is going to be good for this local community, it is going to be good for the State of NSW because it is going to reduce the travelling time between Sydney and Newcastle by nearly half an hour and it's good for the nation because of what it will do in terms of traffic on the Pacific and traffic on the New England. This is all part of our productivity agenda for the future, as well as being an important investment in this local community as well.
Here we have two practical rail and road projects which together are worth getting close to $2 billion. Investments in the future infrastructure we need and supporting jobs and business on the way through. That's the practical response to the challenges that we face with the economy today.
The alternative is, as our opponents did federally in the 2004 election, was promise to fund something called this F3 to Branxton and do nothing. That's what happened. A hollow promise. We're out here, we've committed our money towards doing this Hunter Valley Expressway, we're going to get on with the business of doing it.
Nation building, infrastructure, jobs and apprenticeships, helping business on the way through and doing so responsibly through temporary borrowing for a temporary deficit for the future. That's what leadership requires today, given the extraordinary impact of the global economic recession.
Ladies and gentlemen, it's my privilege to be here today. But this co-investment in the Hunter Valley Expressway would not be possible in the absence of partnership with the NSW Government.
And with those remarks it gives me great pleasure to invite the Premier of NSW to make some remarks.


It's a great day for the nation and it's a great day for Western Australia. Personally, it is a genuine honour to be in this house in Cottlesloe. I'm from Queensland, a fair way away, but no Australian grows up without knowing something of the life of John Curtin and this is the first time I've been here.
I think it says many rich things about Australia and our history. It says, as part and parcel of the great dream that is Australia, that any person of whatever modest beginnings can do and aspire to that which they wish in this great country Australia.
Curtin's origins were modest, this house is a modest house, but he rose to the highest office in our land. Of course, he was a person of talent and ability and dedication.
I think the other great thing which the story of Curtin says, which John Faulkner alluded to before, is here is a man and a very human man and full of human frailties and failings who had to wrestle with his own personal demons and in his own case, the great challenge of alcoholism. He struggled with that and prevailed.
He was therefore a person made of flesh and blood like the rest of us, but a person who saw that his contribution required him to rise above those challenges to make his contribution to the nation. And he did and we are the better for it.
Also, in a house like this, all of us engaged in the rough and tumble and the difficulties and challenges, and sometimes the brutalities of politics, understand that at the end we are nothing without our families. And here in this house, which has been here for the better part of three quarters of a century, you can sense that John Curtin was also the product of the nurture and the love of his family, as those of us engaged in public political life continue to be today. In a room like this, the warmth and the support, the succour, the friendship, the unquestioning love towards a person committed to political life - even in the case of national political life which would have you removed from this city for months and months on end to a distant place called Canberra - speaks much I think about the absolute and fundamental importance of the love of family. 
The last thing to say about this day is Curtin's extraordinary contribution to our national survival.
Yesterday, it was my privilege to visit with the Premier, Geraldton and to visit, in my case, for the first time the memorial which we have now designated a national memorial for the HMAS Sydney.
When Curtin became Prime Minister, this was one of many extraordinary sad tidings for the nation, the loss of 645 of our sailors in that engagement off the coast of Western Australia. From the end of 1941, through to the dark days of ‘42 and through to ‘43, his life in political office was full of one almost unending tide of bad news.
Yet it says something about the calibre of the man that in the midst of that tide of bad news that he could summon the energy, summon the courage and summon the quality of leadership to see that there was in fact a destination called victory. And he prevailed and the nation came in his wake  -  the nation I think also encouraged by the fact that they saw in Curtin one of us.
I'm pleased that the National Trust has this shovel-ready. I find it interesting that in my two days in the West that I've gone from Oakajee, where we spoke of thousands of jobs to the Northbridge Link this morning where we spoke hundreds of jobs to this humble abode in Cottlesloe where we are talking about 16.
So we are moving from deep sea ports to rail redevelopment to restumping the back verandah. Do whatever work's necessary. But you know something, this is good work because what it also says about those who attend here this morning is that one of the great qualities of being Australian is that on the things that matter we transcend the smaller things which divide us and that is reflected very much in the work of all in the preservation of this important monument for the nation. Thank you.


It's great to be back home here at the ANU  -  the place that, after I arrived as a student in 1976, in many ways helped shape my future, as it has done for generations of students since. 
The ANU gave the opportunity of a world class tertiary degree to this country boy from Queensland.
The ANU equipped me with the skills to speak Mandarin and begin thinking about Australia's future place in the 21st century, the Asia-Pacific century.
And somewhat more importantly, the ANU gave me Therese  -  whom I met over a bowl of cornflakes at Burgmann College in Orientation Week.
The ANU has been doing great things for generations of students from throughout Australia and from overseas, for sixty years.
When you walk around looking at the 200-odd buildings on the campus, you notice that the ANU doesn't have a lot of sandstone.
There's not a whole lot of ivy crawling up the outside walls.
But in just sixty years the ANU has created its own history.
Its researchers have made discoveries of international significance.
Its scholarship is world-class.
And in the Asia-Pacific century that lies ahead of us, the ANU is well positioned to make a very important contribution to the Australian nation and to our region.
Because the ANU holds a special place as a strategic endowment for our nation.
The Government's vision for the ANU is to build on this great national endowment.
That was Ben Chifley's vision, and it is mine. 
It's striking today to read again the parliamentary debates of the 1940s over the establishment of the ANU, as the ANU Reporter recently noted.
The ANU attracted far from universal support.
Some conservatives said that we shouldn't bother with the ANU, since Australia could never build an institution to match the splendour of the greatest British institutions.
Many looked across the meadows from Parliament House towards the ANU with scepticism.
Even Sir Robert Menzies, though a supporter of the Bill that established the university, scoffed at the pretension of calling the modest collection of buildings here a “National University”.
Some of the attacks sound remarkably familiar to us today.
The irascible Archie Cameron, the MP for Barker who had once led the Country Party but had since defected to the Liberals, complained in the Parliament that:
“I do not believe that the Federal Capital warrants a university of any kind. It is high time that this Parliament began to show some considerations for the downtrodden taxpayer, and realised that expenditure of millions of pounds on all kinds of projects that the Government is undertaking must cease.”
The Victorian Liberal Senator John Leckie fulminated in the Senate:
“What will be the purpose of this synthetic, provincial university?”
And the Independent MP for the Northern Territory, Adair Blain, was particularly disturbed by the fact that one of the research schools would be for social sciences:
“No doubt, provision of such a school has been inserted in the Bill as a result of the influence exerted on the Government by the ‘rat-bags' who attend the meeting of the Summer School of Political Science. 
In 1937 I attended the sessions of that school in Albert Hall, Canberra and was amazed at the ‘rat-bag' theories advanced by some of the speakers. Yet some of them are now senior officers of the Commonwealth Public Service.”
I suspect that final observation is something that Opposition Senators might wish to revisit in Senate Estimates today.
Despite all the criticisms, there were also many strong advocates for the ANU.
One of the keenest voices was that of the young Member for Fremantle, who three decades later would serve as the Education Minister who opened up a university education to the kids of the working class.
Today, his son is the Chancellor of the Australian National University.
Six decades after its establishment, the Australian National University is fulfilling the dreams of the great visionaries of the 1940s such as John Dedman, the Minister for Post-war Reconstruction; Sir Mark Oliphant; Sir Howard Florey; Sir Keith Hancock and ‘Nugget' Coombs.
Dedman's vision was that a great national capital needed a great national university  -  one that could bring credit to Australia, advance the cause of research and learning, and take its rightful place amongst the great universities of the world.
Today, we can proudly say that the vision they held for the ANU  -  against the cynics and naysayers of the day  -  has been realised.
The ANU is regularly ranked as Australia's leading university by global university ranking systems, including the Shanghai Jiao Tong University and the annual Times Higher Education Supplement rankings.
And the John Curtin School of Medical Research is a sparkling jewel in the ANU crown.
So it is terrific to see the university community coming together for today's opening of the School's new facilities.
As the world tracks the spread of the H1N1 flu strain, we're all reminded just how important is the work of medical research at schools like this one.
Yours is the work of saving lives  -  restoring, curing and protecting the young; the old; rich and poor alike  -  through world-changing discoveries and breakthroughs.
And the John Curtin School's track record in medical research is truly exceptional.
Over the past 60 years, scientists working here have made major discoveries and contributions to world health  -  including winning two Nobel Prizes.
Sir John Eccles won the Nobel Prize in 1963 for his remarkable and outstanding work on the neurosciences  -  and its impact is still being felt today in brain research.
Peter Doherty became a household name for his discovery of how the body's immune cells protect against viruses, winning, along with Rolf Zinkernagel the 1996 Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine.
Many other international awards have been won by scientists from the School, notably among them Professor Frank Fenner.
More recently, immunology pioneer Professor Chris Goodnow has been elected as a Fellow of the prestigious UK and Commonwealth academy of science, The Royal Society.
And Dr Carola de Vinuesa - this year has won the Gottschalk Medal for research in the medical sciences by an early-career researcher  -  after also being award the Life Scientist of the Year at last year's Prime Minister's Prizes for Science.
Dr Vinuesa's research reflects the important role of medical research in another important priority for Australia  -  our contribution to global efforts to achieve the Millennium Development Goals and make extreme global poverty history.
As a young Spanish volunteer medic working in Africa and India, Carola saw first-hand the impact of infectious diseases that still kill millions of people  -  and her research on immune systems offers hope for millions of people threatened by infectious diseases in some of the world's poorest nations.
Australia needs schools such as the John Curtin School to achieve the breakthroughs in medical science that prevent disease, cure illnesses and deliver a better quality of life.
This is why the Australian Government has provided a significant contribution towards the building of the new John Curtin School of Medical Research over and above our ongoing funding for the ANU.
In this month's Federal Budget, an additional $60 million from the Health and Hospitals Fund package was approved for construction of the Eccles Institute to house all neuroscience research activities at the School.
The ANU has also been allocated $90 million in the second round of the Education Investment Fund for Stage 2 of the ANU Science Transformation, the chemical sciences hub.
This will help develop education and research facilities which will form an internationally significant concentration of science talent and excellence and strengthen the ANU's reputation as a world class teaching, learning, research and research training university.
These initiatives will also generate local jobs during the construction phases, as well as permanently creating 15 additional high-tech positions, including several apprenticeships, and another 30 permanent academic and professional positions.
The Australian Government believes that innovation and research are crucial to Australia's long-term prosperity and building a 21st century economy that is not held hostage to the ups and downs of global commodity markets.
Universities and the research and innovation systems provide the intellectual fuel that drives our national innovation system, ultimately making us more productive, more competitive and better able to address the challenges of the 21st century.
The 2009 Budget has delivered significant long-term investments in higher education and national innovation.
As part of this package, the Australian Government is providing additional university funding of $2.2 billion over the next four years. 
This funding makes possible, among other things, the important reform of shifting to a university funding system that is based on student demand.
We have committed $490 million to introduce demand-driven funding arrangements. This will help us to acheive the Government's target by 2025, of having 40 per cent of Australians aged 25-34 with at least a Bachelor level qualification.
We are introducing more generous indexation arrangements - $577 million will be provided over four years to increase indexation of Commonwealth grants for teaching and research.
We are addressing the relatively low participation in higher education of students from low socio-economic backgrounds.
$436 million will be allocated to support increased participation of low socio-economic students, including enabling universities to run outreach programs, and rewarding universities on a per student basis for enrolling students from low socio-economic status backgrounds.
We're also investing in a new era of research and innovation, to support and reward Australian research groups performing at world-class levels.
The Government has committed $512 million over four years to correct the entrenched problem of cross-subsidisation of the indirect costs of research. 
A further $36 million has been committed to assist implementation of the Excellence in Research Australia measure.
And $51 million has been provided to increase the support available to Australian Postgraduate Award recipients.
Each of these initiatives will have an impact here on the ground at the ANU.
Further, as part of the Government's Nation Building Package announced in December 2008, the ANU will be allocated over $18 million from the Teaching and Learning Capital Fund.
This includes a special payment of $10 million recognising the ANU's unique mix of teaching and research.
These measures are all additional to the $24 million that the ANU received in 2008 under the Better Universities Renewal Fund.
These are all important measures that address the long-term neglect of tertiary education in Australia for more than a decade.
Looking ahead, the Government intends to develop compacts with each of our nation's universities as part of our long-term commitment to the education revolution.
Compacts will play a key role in implementing our reforms and ensuring results from increased Commonwealth investment.
Among other things, these compacts will set out the arrangements for distributing performance-based funding for teaching and research activity.
The Compact that we sign with the ANU will reflect the status of the ANU as a university of national significance.
I welcome Vice-Chancellor Ian Chubb's recent comments that this is the compacts approach “with teeth”.
Professor Chubb has long argued that Australia needs compacts that will hold universities to hard decisions.
Compacts that do not simply endorse what universities say about themselves, but chart a course for specialisation, diversity and excellence.
As the Government refreshes Australia's national commitment to the ANU, we intend to recognise its unique place in the national educational firmament.
That process will also provide the opportunity to address the funding anomalies which arose in part from the ANU's principled stand against the industrial relations policies of the last Government.
And the Compact will ensure that ANU can continue to play the leading role in advanced research that has taken it in just over 60 years to be among the top 50 universities in the world.
I believe that men like Dedman, Florey, Oliphant and Curtin and Chif himself would be immensely proud to see what the ANU has become.
But let's not get too comfortable with what's in the past.
Let's look to the future.
In the intensely competitive and globalised world of tertiary institutions, the ANU will need to fight hard to hold its place and advance its reputation in the decades ahead.
But as it does that, it will have the support of the national Government.
Because the work of this university produces great benefits to our nation  -  economic, social, educational and health benefits.
And the new John Curtin School of Medical Research will be a flagship for the ANU, as it continues to generate the research and breakthroughs that in past decades have brought such prestige and acclaim.
It therefore gives me great pleasure to declare the new John Curtin School of Medical Research building open.


In only seven years the Shangri-La Dialogue has cemented itself as the pre-eminent defence and security dialogue in the Asia Pacific region.
The successful development of the Shangri-La Dialogue is symbolic, in some ways, of Singapore's own emergence as a critical player in our region.
From its independence 43 years ago, when some thought this new political entity, Singapore would not survive. Singapore has developed into a thriving, influential nation-state that it is today. 
Singapore has become a major centre of regional and world trade; a global transport hub and an international financial centre. 
Singapore has maintained a peaceful multi-ethnic society in a region where ethnic tensions have, from time to time, been acute.
And Singapore continues as a strong force for stability and effective diplomacy in our region  -  and therefore a most appropriate place for this regular dialogue to be held.
Ladies and gentleman, at the forefront of every government's mind today is the global economic crisis.
Twelve months ago, the International Monetary Fund forecast that the world economy would expand by 3.8 per cent. 
Earlier this month, the IMF announced that in 2009, world economic output would contract by 1.3 per cent. Much, very much has changed.
This is the first time the global economy will contract since the war.
What began as a financial crisis, has become an economic crisis and then an employment crisis; in some countries becoming a social crisis and political crisis, and prospectively fuelling a new range of security crises yet to fully unfold.
In Japan exports have contracted 43 per cent in just six months.
In China exports have contracted 33 per cent.
In South East Asia the total GDP of the ASEAN members contracted by around 13 per cent in the course of 2008.
The Asian Development Bank has predicted the global recession could in 2009 lead to an additional 62 million people living in poverty in Asia.
Through the G20, the international community is rising to these challenges.
Through the G20, national governments have responded with stimulus packages worth nearly 2.5 trillion US dollars to ameliorate the effects of this crisis.
Over one trillion dollars of that stimulus is government measures in our own region, in addition to the total stimulus measures in the United States worth one trillion dollars in its own right.
Japan, China, and Korea have also delivered large-scale packages that help to support not only their domestic economies but, importantly, regional commerce as well.
Through the G20, the world has also agreed to $1.1 trillion for the international financial institutions to guard against future financial crises, particularly in emerging markets.
And through the G20, we've also agreed to act against an outbreak of protectionism, which would only harm everybody's interests.
The governments in this region and the world have responded quickly, decisively and remarkably together to confront the common economic danger.
We have recognised that coordinated measures deliver the greatest results.
In short, we have responded to the crisis with cooperation.
When the Great Depression hit in the 1930s this was not the case. Each country responded to protect its national interests to the detriment of others.
The prescriptions they chose back then served nobody's interests.
The Great Depression was as long and as severe as it was because the international community resorted to nationalist competition rather than international cooperation.
These were the economic consequences of the Depression.
In seeking to protect itself, each country harmed itself.
Furthermore, the social, political and security consequences of this outbreak of rampant economic nationalism in the 1930s was disastrous for the world at large.
This time, we have, thankfully, responded differently  -  both at the Washington Summit in November and the London Summit in April.
When the governments of the world gathered most recently in London, they crafted together a global strategy for economic recovery.
The G20 brings together the established and the emerging powers. 
The G20 straddles all continents and all major regions: five from Asia, five from the Americas, five from Europe and five from other regions including Africa  -  as well as including the most populous Muslim country, Indonesia.
The G20 bridges therefore the strategic and economic weight of the present and of the future.
It is small enough to have efficiency but large enough to have legitimacy
Its combined membership makes up 75 per cent of global GDP, 85 per cent of global trade and two thirds of the world's population.
All of the largest economies in the Asia-Pacific region are represented in the G20  -  and ASEAN was also present at the London meeting.
What has also struck me as a participant of the London Summit about the G20 is the degree of transparency and cooperation countries have brought to the table at this time of great economic crisis. 
There has been a remarkable degree of collective determination to work together for the collective good. This has been good global leadership.
Leadership where the G20 through its membership reaches out to the wider international community to seek ideas to shape policy; to forge the political consensus for strong programs of action; and then to build support for outcomes once reached.
Much of course remains to be done.
And I look forward to the next G20 Summit in Pittsburgh in September to continue our collaborative responses to the global economic crisis.
Of course, this recent example of global economic cooperation, we have already seen at a regional level here in South East Asia  -  and across a much broader policy scope.
Back in the 1960s, South East Asia was faced with a choice.
In the midst of the Cold War, with newly independent nations finding their feet, the nations of this region were faced with a choice about their future.
The choice was how to shape their region; how to look beyond their own borders and to build a region that would support their ambition to grow in peace, stability and prosperity.
The nations of South East Asia  -  including of course our hosts Singapore chose, actively chose cooperation. They chose to shape their common future together.
They chose to form the Association of South East Asian Nations.
At its core was the notion that through cooperation, rather than conflict or competition, all members, all members would be better off.
Implicit in the choice made by those farsighted leaders in the 1960s is the notion of interdependence  -  that the future of a nation depends on the future of the nations around it; that by building communities of nations, all members of the community reap greater rewards than they could working alone.
The results of course speak for themselves.
ASEAN has played an important role in building a stable strategic foundation for South East Asia, when before its creation this was far from the case.
And that stability has enabled its member nations to grow from strength to strength. It has also allowed the influence of South East Asia to be felt in the region and beyond.
Tonight I want to draw on the great example of ASEAN and talk about the future of our wider region in this the Asia Pacific century.
I want to draw on the lessons of ASEAN and argue that as a wider region we also have long-term choices before us.
The choice is whether we seek actively to shape the future of our wider region  -  the Asia Pacific region  -  by building the regional architecture we need for the future, if we are together to shape a common regional future.
Or whether instead, we will adopt a passive approach  -  where we simply wait and see what evolves, whether that enhances stability or whether in fact it undermines stability.
Do we sit by and allow relations between states to be buffeted by economic and strategic shifts and shocks. Or do we seek to build institutions to provide anchorages of stability able to withstand the strategic stresses and strains of the future, when they inevitably arise.
In the first half of the 20th century, we saw the tragic consequences of rampant nationalism as nations competed for power.
Great powers in Europe bumped up against each other without the benefit of regional institutions to smooth problems as they arose.
The result was devastating conflict.
For our own region, we cannot simply assume that peace and prosperity are the inevitable products of human progress.
Will we make choices for cooperation or conflict?
Will we make active choices for cooperation; or allow drift to set in that takes us in the reverse direction.
Will we seek a framework of shaping the institutions of common security for our region; or will we allow traditional interstate tensions to evolve and in some cases escalate.
It will take us time to make the choices before us.
But the first step in this process is that we need to have the regional conversation about our trajectory for the future  -  about what sort of region we want to be in 2020 and beyond.
We need to have a discussion about what we have. We need to have a discussion about what we want to be. And, if there is agreement on this, what steps might be useful in realising our common regional future.
History tells us that cooperation delivers benefits in strategic stability, not just in economic growth.
The truth is we must work hard at peace and stability because the possibilities of miscommunication, of miscalculation, and misadventure are always great.
And that cooperation, transparency and common endeavour represent the exception, which means our conscious efforts to enhance cooperation must always be the greater because the natural default position tends to be suspicion rather than cooperation.
Within East Asia there are also other particular dynamics at play.
South-East Asian growth is altering traditional strategic, strong East Asian growth is altering relativities making the management of regional security even more complicated.
America's capacity for economic re-invention and renewal should never be underestimated. 
And, while China's remarkable development will continue, we should not underestimate the challenges China faces in balancing its engines of growth from exports to domestic consumption, potentially a turning point in East Asia's future economic growth. 
Managing major power relations  -  particularly in the context of the rise of China and India  -  will be crucial for our collective future. 
This will place a premium on wise statecraft, particularly the effective management of relations between the United States, Japan, China and India. 
Over the last half century the United States has underwritten stability in the Asia Pacific. This stability has allowed nations in the region to prosper. And our common interest is for this stability to continue into the future.
But just as economic cooperation cannot be assumed, strategic cooperation too is also a matter of choice. Asia includes the world's two most populous countries; the world's largest holders of foreign exchange reserves; two of the world's top three economies; and three of the world's five largest militaries, there's a lot going on in our neighbourhood.
The centre of global geo-strategic and geo-economic gravity is shifting to our region.
So not only do the countries of our region have an interest in the region's future stability, so too does the world at large.
The simple truth is this; that much of the critical history of the 21st century will be written, shaped and lived out here in our own region.
Together therefore we shoulder great responsibilities both regional and global.
Also in our region we have the United States, which will remain for the foreseeable future the single most powerful strategic actor through a combination of military, economic and soft power, and the only nation capable of projecting power globally.
This strategic primacy of the United States will continue to be vital in the maintenance of stability. As other countries become more affluent, their military spending will also increase.
Strategically therefore, our region will be dynamic, not static, adding further to the uncertainties we confront in the future. And in a rapidly changing region, we will therefore face a wide range of emerging security challenges  -  both traditional and non-traditional.
The convergence of: demographic change; population movements; environmental change, energy pressures; resource pressures; global public health concerns; mass migration flows; transnational crime and terrorism will increase rather than reduce the risk of conflict.
And the chance of conflict between states can never be ruled out  -  even if its frequency has declined.
The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, including the possibility of such weapons falling into the hands of terrorists, is a threat of increasing international concern.
Iran's nuclear program is of continuing concern. North Korea's second nuclear test is a threat to the peace and stability of our region. The nuclear test, coupled with the North's ongoing missile development program, is yet another provocative act.
The international community must respond with one voice and with a common program of action against Pyongyang.
The United Nations Security Council must be of common resolve against a regime which is so reckless in relation to our common security. 
The security challenges we face are therefore many and complex.
And to help manage this complex security agenda in a region where security relativities are not static but dynamic, we will need together to calmly think through the mechanisms we may need to foster active collaboration for the future.
We need robust structures that can cope with dynamic environments.
We also need to build the habits of dialogue, discussion and cooperation that will help minimise friction and provide a mechanism for dealing with it when it arises.
We need mechanisms that help us cope with strategic shocks and discontinuities.
We need a body that brings together the leaders of the key nations in the Asia Pacific region  -  including Indonesia, India, China, Japan, the United States and other nations  -  with a mandate to engage across the breadth of the security, economic and political challenges we will face in the future.
Absent such a body, I am concerned in the long term about the possibility of strategic drift within our region, or even worse strategic polarisation; polarisation which I believe serves nobody's interests.
As presently configured, there is no single regional organisation with a pan-regional mandate that covers the full policy spectrum.
In June last year I proposed the development in the long term of what I have called an Asia Pacific community. An Asia Pacific community could help ensure that the process of regional economic and financial integration keeps moving forward. 
An APC could also help to nurture a culture of cooperation and collaboration on security  -  including a culture of military transparency, helping to build confidence and security building measures by providing information that reassures neighbours rather than alarms them.
An Asia Pacific community could also provide a vehicle for discussion and cooperation across the range of challenges with transnational reach, such as climate change, resource and food security, bio-security and terrorism.
Just as ASEAN built a strong measure of strategic congruence within South East Asia between many countries of different political systems, and, at times, with active hostilities towards one another, so also could an Asia Pacific community over time build up a sharper sense of security community across our wider region.
An Asia Pacific community could be seen as a natural broadening of the processes of confidence, security - and community-building in Southeast Asia led by ASEAN, while ASEAN itself would of course remain central to the region and would also be an important part of any future Asia Pacific community.
The regional groupings and institutions already in place in the Asia-Pacific region all make valuable contributions. 
ASEAN, APEC, the East Asia Summit, ASEAN +3, the ASEAN Regional Forum and other bodies are doing important work in enhancing economic and other forms of cooperation.
As part of our regional conversation about the future of our institutions we can draw strength from their accumulated experience.
That was my goal in appointing a Special Envoy on the Asia Pacific community, Richard Woolcott, a distinguished Australian diplomat who together with others did much of the diplomatic leg work in the formation of APEC twenty years ago. Mr Woolcott visited capitals in the region to discuss the Asia Pacific community proposal over the last 12 months.
The Government greatly appreciates the frank and constructive discussions Mr Woolcott was able to have with governments and non-government institutions across the region.
He has now provided his report to me and I would like to outline his key findings and where we might go from here.
First, there has been broad agreement on the value of a focused discussion about how regional architecture can best serve all our interests in the future.
Everyone, it seems, has been keen to put forward their view about the idea of developing an Asia Pacific community and understandably these views are far from uniform.
And this is something that I welcome. The whole point of this initiative is to begin the conversation about where we need to go.
Secondly, there is widespread recognition that our current structures do not provide a single forum for all relevant leaders to discuss the full range of political, economic and security challenges we face for the future.
Thirdly, it is clear that no-one wants more meetings. 
There is no appetite for additional institutions.
It is difficult enough for leaders to make it to the range of meetings we already have.
And coming from Australia, where every meeting involves another trip, another voyage, I wholeheartedly agree.
As I have said many times and as my envoy has stated around the region, I have a completely open mind on how we proceed and where we end up.
Australia has no prescriptive view. This is a complex and important matter which needs proper consideration.
The clear conclusion from my envoy's report is that there is interest in the region in this discussion  -  and there is a wish to explore the possibilities without any fixed or final views on a destination.
So my intention is to continue and deepen this conversation in the months ahead with interested parties across the region.
I am pleased to announce tonight that, following the East Asia Summit and APEC meetings later this year, where I will brief leaders personally on the outcomes of my special envoy's discussions and hear their views, Australia will convene a one-and-a-half track conference to further explore the idea of an Asia Pacific community.
We will invite key government officials, academics and opinion makers from around the region to come together and discuss the future of our regional architecture for the 21st century.
For us, this is the next logical step in an unfolding regional conversation.
I look forward to representation from as many countries as possible.
And I look forward to a free-flowing and open discussion about our region, its future and the institutions we might need to maximise our future peace and prosperity.
There will inevitably be disagreement along the way.
This is natural and normal.
In fact it would be abnormal to expect any immediate agreement on such a complex challenge.
That is why I have deliberately set a target of an Asia Pacific community by 2020: comfortably removed from the present but still sufficiently close to focus our collective mind.
Some of you may ask why Australia has put forward this proposal.
The answer is straightforward.
We're committed to active middle power diplomacy.
By ourselves, Australia cannot shape the future of the region we live in.
Nor do we believe our contribution is unique. It is not.
Through skilful diplomacy and through the strength of its contribution, Singapore has become a lynch pin of South East Asian regionalism  -  as this conference itself demonstrates.
Singapore is a model of how countries can use their best assets  -  their people and their ideas, to make a contribution to regional and global order and always with a refreshing, clear, realist perspective.
It is in that tradition that I am committed to Australia making a positive contribution to the international policy debate on the future of our wider region.
I do not believe we can afford to sit idly by while the region simply evolves  -  without any sense of strategic purpose.
In fact I believe this is potentially dangerous.
We do not bring to the table a misty-eyed idealism about some pan-regional utopia.
By contrast, the Australian Government takes a deeply realist approach to security.
But the realism of the international relations of the 21st century necessarily involves a high degree of structured regional and global engagement to be effective in our highly globalised world.
Australia is also a strong believer in the importance of military cooperation and military transparency as contributing to long-term security.
That is why Australia is building on our already strong defence and security relationships around the region.
And it is why we have recently released Australia's first Defence White Paper in nearly a decade.
If sovereign states are clear about their strategic perceptions and their military forces, the risk of miscalculation is reduced.
The White Paper is a frank document that describes how we see the world and how we are shaping our military forces to respond to possible challenges ahead.
It affirms the centrality of Australia's alliance relationship with the United States, and assesses that the United States will remain the most powerful and influential actor up to 2030, the timeframe within which our White Paper is cast. 
And Australia's close alliance with the United States will remain the bedrock on which Australia's national security is built. 
It remains also Australia's view that strategic stability in the region at large is best underpinned by the continued presence of the United States through its network of alliances and security partnerships  -  including with Japan, the RoK and Australia  -  and by significant levels of 
US military capability continuing to be located in the Western Pacific.
The Australian Government will also continue to strengthen its defence and strategic ties with our partners around the region.
We have concluded a Joint Declaration on Security Cooperation with Japan.
In March of this year in Canberra, President Lee of Korea and I issued a Joint Statement on Enhanced Global and Security Cooperation between Australia and the Republic of Korea.
We are active in the ASEAN Regional Forum  -  as we were when it was established 15 years ago.
We maintain the Five Powers Defence agreement with our regional partners in Malaysia and Singapore  -  as well as with New Zealand and the UK.
And we are strengthening our bilateral security links, including with Indonesia through the Lombok Treaty.
The White Paper also makes clear our desire to expand our security dialogue with China and strengthen our defence relationship with India.
Australia has strong security and strategic interests that go well beyond our neighbourhood. Australia by definition is a maritime power with maritime interests.
We are, therefore, deeply focused on the importance of the Indian Ocean and the Pacific Ocean in our own long-term security. We also maintain a special relationship, along with our New Zealand partners, with the Pacific island countries, including uniquely strong ties in defence in a region of direct importance to Australia.
Equally, Australia is of unparalleled strategic importance to these island countries where Australia remains the pre-eminent economic development partner.
The Australia Defence White Paper makes clear our desire to have constructive military relations with a wide range of partners in our region and beyond. 
And, like all nations, our desire is to be able to protect ourselves if needs be. Our Defence policy is based on the need to ensure that Australia can act in its own self defence against a wide range of threats. 
This means that we must have the ability to conduct independent military operations in the defence of Australia by controlling our air and sea approaches and denying any potential adversary the ability to operate in our immediate neighbourhood. 
What we need also to do is build confidence on a solid foundation of transparency and cooperation. This can be done bilaterally. It can be done operationally.
It can for example be done if our combined forces coordinate in rapid response to large scale natural disasters in our region, a region is which regrettably is highly prone to such disasters.
All peoples benefit from such cooperation because natural disasters rather than armed conflict remains the largest threat to life in our region.
But also our militaries would be required to plan together and operate together on a regular basis against a common challenge, thus developing new confidence and security building and transparency measures for the future.
All this must also be done through effective regional institutions.
To conclude, you have some big days of discussion and deliberation ahead of you at this, the region's premier conference on regional security.
You will have the region's best strategic thinkers and shapers of policies leading your discussions. And I think you have a challenge before you. Your challenge is to go beyond describing the trends that we see. It is to go beyond reacting to the trends that we see.
Your challenge is to take the next step, the more difficult step, and think about how we can actively shape those trends for our common regional interests for the future.
We need to build on the strong foundation of regional cooperation we already have. We need to learn from the great experience embodied in ASEAN.
We need to engage the leaders of the key nations of the region in a single forum that makes sense for all, not just for some.
And to act and to actively work against any long-term polarisation of a region so rich in potential for all our peoples and in fact all peoples of the world.
My intention with beginning a dialogue about an Asia Pacific community was precisely that. An Asia Pacific community is not a short-term project. 
It will take time a long time to achieve. A very long time to achieve. History however shows that risks arise not from developing new initiatives for the future.
But from failing to act; failing to anticipate; and failing to shape new sets of strategic realities as they emerge. I am an unapologetic optimist about our region's future.
Just as I am an unapologetic realist about the choices we will need to make for our region's future together.
I thank you for your attention.


It's great to be back in Queensland, for this supreme parliament of working people, the Congress of the Australian Council of Trade Unions. 
But Jeff, Sharan, Joe  -  how on earth did you manage to schedule this speech on a State of Origin night?
And your second crime against humanity  -  to schedule this speech on a State of Origin night in Brisvegas when the home of the ACTU is in Melbourne  -  which is where the State of Origin is being held.
This is a total Victorian conspiracy.
To deny Queensland and NSW delegates of their birthright.
Where's Bill Ludwig or Ron Monaghan when you need ‘em  -  to explain to their Victorian colleagues about such sacred occasions.
Anyway, as Prime Minister I can only be seen to be speaking in the national interest - which is to back Queensland all the way.
As Bill Ludwig would say, what's good for Queensland is good for Australia.
But it's great to welcome Congress back to Queensland.
The State that was the birthplace of the Australian Labor Party  -  and the cradle of the Australian trade union movement in the tumultuous events of the 1890s.
This Saturday, Queensland celebrates its 150th anniversary.
It's a one hundred and fifty year-long history that's been greatly influenced by a strong history of collective representation for working people through the labour movement.
A labour movement that gave Australia one of our greatest Prime Ministers, Andrew Fisher  -  the first Labor leader anywhere in the world to win a parliamentary majority in a national election.
A good friend of Keir Hardie, the founder of the British Labour Party, who he'd served alongside in the prolonged miners' strike on the Ayrshire coalfields in 1881.
And a man whose contributions, a century after he came to office, are only now being understood: the Prime Minister who presided over the introduction of the age pension, which came into effect one hundred years ago on July 1st; a lifelong fighter for fair compensation for injured workers; a great Australian nation-builder who built a stronger, fairer and more secure Australia.
The hundred years since Andrew Fisher's government have seen extraordinary changes in this State and in our nation.
But if the changes of the past hundred years have been extraordinary, the changes in the past 18 months have been no less astonishing.
The Government has confronted the worst global economic collapse in three quarters of a century  -  the result of rampant greed, excessive speculation and unrestrained market forces.
The global crisis is the product of neoliberal ideology based on a form of free market fundamentalism that says that markets are always self-correcting, that markets are always right and governments are always wrong.
This global recession has spread faster, and gone deeper, than any economic slump in our lifetimes.
• every one of the major advanced economies is in recession;
• 24 out of all 30 of the OECD countries are in recession, and
• 29 out of 30 OECD countries have experienced at least one negative quarter of economic growth.
Growth rates around the world have collapsed.
In the first three months of this year, each OECD economy experienced an average contraction of 2.1 per cent - the largest fall in the 50 year history of the OECD.
Unemployment rates are soaring around the world  -  already rising to almost 9 per cent in the US, 8 per cent in France, Germany and Canada, and 7.1 per cent in the UK.
Australia is not immune to this massive global economic slump.
But today's National Accounts figures show what Australians can achieve if we all pull together as a country, and recognise that we are all in this together.
The National Accounts data today showed that the Australian economy grew by 0.4 per cent in the March quarter.
Australia has the fastest growth of all the major advanced economies.
Australia is now the only economy of the major advanced economies not to be in recession.
But we are not out of the woods yet.
Australia's economic performance is not the result of random chance.
It is because Australians have risen to the occasion and because government policy is working to cushion Australia from the worst impacts of the global recession.
Today's figures show that the Government's cash stimulus payments  -  which the Liberals loudly opposed - have worked to cushion Australia from the global recession until our infrastructure investments kick in over the medium term.
Treasury figures confirm that without the cash stimulus payments, Australian growth would have been negative 0.2 and Australia would have been in recession.
Among the major advanced economies, Australia has the lowest budget deficit, the lowest debt and the highest growth.
This result is a tribute to all Australians:
Employers and employees who worked hard to keep their businesses afloat.
Small businesses who took the decision to keep people in work.
Unions, businesses and families who showed resilience and confidence in the face of this global recession.
A tribute to all Australians working together.
The global recession has a long way to go  -  and there is more work to do.
There is no doubt that there will be more ups and downs before this global recession is out.
Growth will continue to be slow for some time.
Unemployment will continue to rise.
And there may be negative growth in the future.
That is why the Government has a long term economic strategy as well as a short term economic strategy.
Australia's response has been to step in with strong, early, decisive action as the private sector retreats.
Since October last year, the Government has invested $77 billion in economic stimulus through a combination of short, medium and long term support for the economy.
In the short term we invested $21 billion to provide immediate support to the economy  -  through cash payments to families, pensioners, veterans, and low income earners.
Those payments have boosted the Australian retail sector.
Australian retail sales are now running at 4.8 per cent above their levels of November last year.
This contrasts with a 1.1% fall across the major advanced economies over the same period.
We invested $2 billion in the First Home Owners Boost to support the housing and construction industry.
In April, total building approvals rose by 5.1 per cent.
Private house approvals have risen for the last four months, to be at their highest level since August 2008.
And the Government acted early and decisively to stabilise the financial sector with a government guarantee for 13 million bank deposits.
Beyond the immediate term the government also acted early to support the economy in the medium term through shovel-ready infrastructure projects, including:
• the largest school modernisation in Australia's history;
• free ceiling insulation for around 2.7 million Australian homes, and
• the construction of more than 20,000 new social and defence homes.
Over the longer term, the Government's strategy is nation-building for recovery.
We are supporting jobs today by investing in the nation-building infrastructure Australia needs for tomorrow.
We are investing in major rail, road and port projects.
We will also be investing up to $43 billion in a partnership to build a high-speed National Broadband Network to finally bring Australia into the global digital economy of the 21st century.
And we'll be investing in major clean energy projects, including the largest solar energy project anywhere in the world.
In total $49 billion  -  or around 70 per cent  -  of our stimulus is directed to nation building infrastructure.
By the end of the year we'll have more than 35,000 construction projects underway around the country.
Every one of these projects is necessary to help build our way out of this global recession.
Our strategy is this: nation-building for recovery.
Supporting jobs, small business and apprenticeships today.
By investing in the nation-building infrastructure we need for tomorrow.
And each time I visit one of these building sites, one of what will be 35,000 building sites, I am struck by the resilience of the Australian people as we all work together to try to cushion our economy from the worst of the global recession.
We have pursued this nation building for recovery strategy because we are unashamedly a Labor Government, committed to Labor values and to supporting working people in the toughest global economic collapse in 75 years.
These measures will support over 200,000 jobs over each of the next two years.
Jobs in retail. Jobs in construction. Jobs in transport. Jobs in hospitality. Jobs in education. Jobs in health. Jobs in small businesses. Jobs in the technology sector. Jobs across our public services.
These are important jobs doing important nation-building work.
And we are also creating new positions for apprentices across the nation, by ensuring that the tendering processes give priority to those businesses with a demonstrated commitment to trainees and apprenticeships.
Because now is the time for us to train a new generation of Australian tradesmen and women  -  instead of waiting until the next skills crisis, like the Liberals did over the decade just past.
Delegates, while we are by no means out of the woods, if the Government had not acted early and decisively, Australia would already be in severe recession.
GDP would have been 2.75 per cent lower over the next twelve months, and a further 1.5 per cent lower in 2010-11.
Over 200,000 more Australians would be out of work.
And a generation of Australians would be facing years of exclusion from the labour market.
This Government has not and will not stand idly by while the economy suffers the greatest external shock in three quarters of a century.
This Government believes in making a difference.
We cannot wish the global recession away.
But we can act to cushion the impact of that recession on Australian working families - and that is what we will continue to do.
But there are still some people in Australian national life who would rather score a political point than support the jobs of Australia's working people.
Malcolm Turnbull and the Liberal Party oppose these nation-building investments and criticise the necessary deficits and debt that underpin them  -  pretending they'd never have happened if the Liberal Party was still in power.
As if the $210 billion collapse in government revenues had never happened  -  the largest single collapse in government revenues in history.
But when pressed, they admit they'd have virtually the same deficit and debt as the Government.
Our deficit is the lowest of the worlds most advanced economies.
Our debt is the lowest of the world's most advanced economies.
Our AAA credit rating was re-affirmed after the Budget.
Yet still they talk the economy down.
While we seek to build the economy up.
But if you want to see absolute hypocrisy on display  -  watch out for the stampede of Libs and Nats lining up for photo opportunities at local nation-building projects in their electorates.
Claiming ownership for them locally, while voting against them nationally.
The hypocrisy is breathtaking.
If Malcolm Turnbull had his way, the stimulus would not have happened.
The global recession would have thrown thousands more Australian businesses against the wall, and thrown hundreds of thousands more Australian workers out of work.
And a generation of young Australians would be condemned to long-term unemployment.
If the Liberal Party was still in power, Australia would still have Work Choices; still have AWAs; the Government would still be in denial about climate change, and the global recession would be wreaking absolute havoc on our economy as the free market ideologues sat on their hands and waited for the market to “self correct”.
As others have said in recent times, maybe one of the reasons it's called an invisible hand is that sometimes it's just not there.
Delegates, this Labor Government is rising to the challenge that the global economy has thrown at us.
This Labor Government is standing up for working people, against the massive threat of this global economic crisis  -  and we will continue to do so.
But let this be clearly understood.
The Government is nation building for a stronger long-term future, not just nation-building for jobs and recovery today.
Our $77 billion stimulus investment delivers the greatest-ever national investment in productivity-boosting infrastructure and education in our nation's history.
Because these are the investments that will build a stronger, more productive Australian economy beyond the recovery and for the future.
Investments that for 12 years were neglected by the Liberal Party when they were in power, as infrastructure crumbled and more than 300,000 young Australians were turned away from TAFE colleges.
The Government has begun to deliver an education revolution in our pre-schools, schools, TAFEs, universities and research centres.
We have also committed to a Jobs and Training Compact that delivers training, support and local initiatives to help Australians get back to work.
The three-pronged Jobs and Training Compact comprises a Compact with Young Australians, a Compact with Retrenched Workers and a Compact with Local Communities, with our efforts targeted to those at greatest risk.
Alongside these measures to support jobs and local communities, we're also supporting jobs in highly exposed industries like manufacturing.
Just yesterday, General Motors in the United States went into bankruptcy  -  the largest industrial bankruptcy in US history.
Industry Minister Kim Carr has worked extensively with General Motors Holden and the unions in anticipation of this event.
And the good news is that the bankruptcy filing in the US does not threaten Holden workers in Australia, and will not directly affect local engineering and manufacturing operations.
And as Holden has made clear, the forward-looking support from the Government's $6.2 billion New Green Car Plan has helped secure the future of Holden's operations in Australia.
Delegates, I have no time for those who constantly denigrate the Australian automotive industry.
As I said to the national Parliament yesterday, Australia is one of only 15 countries in the world that can produce a car from scratch  -  and we should be proud of it. 
And with leadership from the Government through the Green Car Innovation Fund, Australians can look to a future in which we will be producing more innovative, fuel-efficient vehicles.
Delegates, in just 18 months in office we have opened a new chapter in our nation's great tradition of the ‘fair go'.
The fair go is no longer heading out the nation's back door.
It's now back in the front room.
And it's there to stay.
We have stopped the Liberal Party's AWAs, which stripped away basic rights from working Australians.
Employees now have a right to protection from being unfairly sacked and to redundancy pay.
And for the first time in history, from July 1st Australian workers will have a right to good-faith collective bargaining.
I want to pay tribute to Julia Gillard for her extraordinary effort in working with the union movement, employers and other stakeholders to get the Fair Work Act through the Parliament, even though we don't have the numbers in the Senate.
The Government has also delivered record investments in homelessness and housing, education and training and in helping parents to balance work and family life.
We have delivered $46.7 billion in tax relief to working Australians, delivering an extra $60 per week for a family with a combined income of $100,000.
For the first time in our nation's history we have delivered a Paid Parental Leave scheme  -  a cause for which the ACTU has fought tirelessly.
For the first time in 100 years we have fundamentally reformed the single age pension.
We've delivered the nation's first-ever permanent carers' supplement of $600.
We have extended the child-care tax rebate to 50 per cent, invested in training child care workers and begun building new child care centres  -  with a total $12.8 billion commitment to child care.
We have delivered the nation's largest-ever investments to tackle homelessness, invest in 21,000 new social housing units and help younger Australians into their first home.
And after delivering the national apology last year, the Government has made a $4.6 billion investment in closing the gap in Indigenous disadvantage in life expectancy, health, education and employment outcomes.
The Government is also tackling the critical challenges of the future that for 12 years were neglected by the Liberal Party.
The Government has delivered successive chapters of the education revolution  -  establishing universal pre-schooling from 2013; the largest school modernisation program in Australian history; investing in the digital revolution for all middle and senior high school students; investing in trades training centres for the benefit of every Australian secondary school; providing 711,000 TAFE and vocational education and training places, and delivering the biggest long-term investment in higher education and research in our history.
In real terms, our investment in education over the next five years has been lifted by more than 50 per cent.
After 12 years of Liberal Party neglect, this is an education revolution.
We have also begun the reform of our health and hospitals system, with a new $64 billion funding agreement for public hospitals, a $750 million direct investment in emergency departments and a $600 million investment in elective surgery waiting lists.
We are investing in our health workforce - funding the training of approximately 18,000 nurse supervisors, 5,000 allied health and VET supervisors, and 7,000 medical supervisors.
We have invested $3.2 billion into 36 major health infrastructure projects, including a $1.2 billion national integrated cancer care initiative.
And already, more than 258,000 teenagers have taken advantage of our Teen Dental plan to get a preventative dental check.
We have also ended the era of climate change denial.
We have ratified the Kyoto Protocol.
We have invested $4.5 billion in a Clean Energy Initiative to support clean coal and solar and renewable energy technologies.
We have invested $4 billion in energy efficiency measures.
And this week Parliament has begun debating legislation to create the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme.
We know the design of the CPRS will never satisfy all the demands and expectations of its different constituencies.
But it is a fundamental reform for our economy and our environment.
It will make possible the transition to a low pollution economy, and help to generate the clean energy jobs of tomorrow.
Delegates, there's one measure of the partnership between trade unions and the modern Labor Party.
And it's not how many resolutions are passed at a national conference.
It's what we deliver that truly benefits the Australian people.
Labor's modern bargain with working people has two dimensions  - 
First, humanising the workplace, and second, cushioning working families against the coldest forces of an unrestrained free market.
On the first of these, we now have a fair industrial relations system that's built to last.
A system for the future.
A system under which the trade union movement will no longer be hindered in its important work of representing the concerns of working people.
A system that gets the balance right.
The Government that I lead sees the Fair Work Act as a fundamental reform in Labor's proud reform tradition - alongside such reforms as Medicare and universal superannuation.
These are historic reforms, delivered in partnership with the trade union movement, that have made Australia a fundamentally fairer nation for working people.
Both Medicare and compulsory super became so strongly supported by a majority of Australians, that even a Liberal Government that spent twelve years in office could not destroy them.
Remember that even as late as 1993, the Liberal Party was sworn to get rid of them both.
But by '96, that had changed  -  or at least until Malcolm Turnbull re-opened the debate on the future of universal health care just one month ago.
These fundamental reforms were secured because a majority of Australians understood them and benefited from them.
And importantly, they were supported by a partnership between Labor and the union movement.
Subsequent conservative governments did not abolish them, and could not abolish them.
Together, we must resolve to make the same thing true of the Fair Work Act.
I want Fair Work to be a long-term reform that endures for decades.
Our resolve as a movement must be that no future Liberal Government can get away with dismantling it.
But delegates, that won't be easy.
Because the Liberals remain committed to a return to Work Choices.
A return to AWAs.
A return to the past.
The Government believes it's now time to turn our focus to the second part of the modern bargain with working families and working people  -  the lifetime-long span of Labor reforms.
Our challenge is to ensure that all Australians have the support and the opportunities they need throughout each of the stages and points of transition in their lives - as they learn, work, raise a family, enjoy the security of proper health care, make the most of their talents and contribute to their communities.
This is nothing less than the modern equivalent of the Harvester judgement one hundred years ago...
The great decision that guaranteed workers a standard of living which was reasonable for "a human being in a civilised community."
A quarter of a century ago, the Hawke and Keating Governments formed a historic partnership with the union movement to develop the social wage - the partnership that delivered Medicare, universal superannuation and a strong safety net of support.
Ours must also be an historic partnership for the future  -  a 21st century social wage.
In this century, we must protect that legacy and build on those achievements by supporting the lifelong participation of every citizen in work and life.
A reform agenda that begins with the paid parental leave that helps parents to spend time with new-born babies.
That extends to flexible leave arrangements, quality care and pre-school during a child's earliest years.
That through the education revolution delivers a world class education, with excellent teaching, in modern facilities, with modern technology  -  so that we become the best educated, best trained and best skilled workforce anywhere in the world.
A nation that provides personalised assistance for those who struggle with the transition into work, the transition between jobs, or who need a hand when life's vicissitudes knock them down.
That supports Australians at key times like when they are sick, or when they buying a first home, and when they need help raising their kids.
And as the years pass, giving support for those who need to care for their loved ones.
And providing income security when we enter our retirement years, through superannuation and an age pension that lets older Australians live with dignity.
This is the modern agenda for a modern Labor Government.
And we value our partnership with the Australian trade union movement in developing and implementing these reforms.
Out of all the items swirling around in public debate, in ten, fifteen or twenty years' time, it's major reforms like these that will truly make a difference in the lives of working families.
And in partnership, we can deliver these reforms and write a historic chapter in our nation's history.
Delegates, in 18 months Labor in government has achieved much.
But much remains to be done.
But there is a hard slog ahead, and tough terrain to navigate.
We all know how important it is that Australians have a Labor Government to stand by them in these tough times.
As Australians, we're all in this together.
In this together - as business and unions; as communities right across our vast land.
And together, we can make our way through this recession and build an Australia that is stronger, that is fairer, prepared for all the challenges of the future, a place where the dreams and aspirations of working people can be fulfilled whatever their background, whatever the colour of their skin, whatever part of Australia they may come from.
For that was the Labor movement's mission in the past.
And that must be the Labor movement's mission for the future. 


: Let me begin by simply saying this to all Queenslanders whatever their political persuasion: happy 150th birthday Queensland. To reach 100 is a great achievement. To reach 150 is a stupendous achievement.
Think of Queen Victoria, she who is reputed to have said about many things ‘we are not amused'. If she was to reflect upon what this State has achieved in the 150 years since she signed the Letters Patent in 1859, whether she was amused or not amused Queen Victoria would be absolutely stunned by what has been achieved here.
Think of these 150 years. Queensland has moved from being a backwater to being the trailblazer. This is an extraordinary achievement. Think of those 150 years, a tribute to the women and men of Queensland who have crafted a future out of the soil of this great State.
A tribute to indigenous Queenslanders who were custodians of this soil for millennia before European settlers first arrived here less than two centuries ago.
A tribute to farmers who crafted a living out of the land, who literally fought flood and drought and natural plague to craft a living for themselves and their families from the soil.
A tribute to the men and women of business, those who pioneered the idea that we could have something called a Queensland and Northern Territory Airline Service, which three-quarters of a century later becomes one of the largest and oldest continuing airlines in the world.
A tribute to the men and women of the union movement who crafted the idea of the fair go into the national soul.
A tribute also, also to our educators, to our teachers, to those who have been out there in one-teacher schools 100 miles from nowhere. And those who 100 years ago dreamt of building something called a university, which became the University of Queensland.
A tribute to doctors and nurses and those with a pioneering vision who said ‘let us build something called a Royal Flying Doctor Service' to provide much-needed medical services to the bush and who dreamt to build something called the Royal Brisbane Hospital. A tribute to all these Queenslanders, each and every one of them.
And to our poets, those who have told the stories of where we have come from. Those who have described our identity. Those like Banjo Patterson who at Dagworth Station in 1895 crafted the words of Waltzing Matilda. And of course most importantly of all, our most ancient of sacred ceremonies, a tribute to Darren Lockyer and the Maroons who once again have thumped the Blues in what can only be described in a national exercise in social justice. But it is important not to be triumphalist. Just to be privately gleeful.
Friends, in these 150 years we have shaped something truly great in this State of Queensland, something truly, truly great. We have grown from some 30,000 people at the time that this State was separated from NSW to 4.3 million people 150 years later. We have gone from being at the margins of the nation's deliberations to being at the centre stage of the nation's deliberations. We have gone from being a backwater to being the trailblazers. All Queenslanders should be proud of what has been achieved in these 150 years.
Friends, the Australian Labor Party has been a part, a core part of this great State's development for 120 of those 150 years. Our Party and our movement were founded in this State in 1891. We formed the first Labor Government anywhere in the world in 1899. It was here that we gave rise to the first majority Labor Prime Minister in the world in Andrew Fisher, in the first decade of our nation's federation.
It was here in Queensland that we pioneered under Labor Premier TJ Ryan worker's compensation so that workers when they are injured at work could receive the attention they needed and not simply rely upon the bleak charity of the day. It was here, also in Queensland that we pioneered the notion of a free hospital system under a Labor Premier Ned Hanlon.
And then it was here most recently that again we wrote a new chapter in our nation's political history, for the first time electing a woman leader in her own right as the first woman Premier of an Australian state, in Anna Bligh.
And friends it was this state, Queensland, which made it possible in November of 2007 for the federal Labor Party to return a federal Labor Government for the first time since Bob Hawke's election in 1983.
Friends, these are the achievements which we have seen in Queensland these last 150 years. These are the achievements we have seen through Queensland Labor in these last 120 years. These are things legitimately we celebrate from the past. But ours has always been a party of progress. Ours has always been a party of the future, ours has always been a party which actually dreams of a light on the hill and marches resolutely in that direction. That has been our galvanising vision for 120 years. That will be our galvanising vision for our next 120 years as a Party and as a movement.
For this to occur we need leadership. Leadership prepared to confront the challenges which are thrown against this nation. In the last year or so that I have been Prime Minister of Australia we have had thrown at this nation an economic challenge of the type which none of our predecessors have faced since the Great Depression of the 1930s.
This has seen a stupendous global economic downturn. What we see across the world is all the major economies in recession, what we see across the world is across the most advanced economies who are members of the Organisation of Economic Cooperation and Development, practically all of those economies in recession and those who are not, the rest experiencing negative growth.
Friends this is one of the largest simultaneous global economic downturns the world has ever seen and certainly the largest the world has seen since the deep and dark days of the global Depression. And when these things are thrown at us and where you see the wheels of finance grind almost to a halt, where you see the wheels of commerce grind almost to a halt, where you see exports contracting across the world, where you see millions of workers being thrown onto the unemployment queues in economies around the world, you can do either of two things.
You can stand back and say this is not my problem. You can stand back and say I can do nothing. You can stand back and say I will blame somebody else. Or you can step up to the fight. You can stand in the breach. You can act as Government to make a difference. This federal Labor Government has resolved to make a difference.
Friends in the dark days of September-October last year, many here would not know how close we came to a complete collapse of the world financial system. We saw some 30 of the world's largest banks around the world either collapse or having to be bailed out by their national governments.
We saw the complete drying up of the flow of international credit to economies around the world including our own. It is perhaps not known by all delegates here that in the critical months of October-November-December last year, international lines of credit to Australia's major banks shrank to zero. That is how close we came to a global financial abyss in the critical months at the end of last year.
The Government, the Labor Government, the federal Labor Government met to resolve what action we should take. We resolved that for the first time in this nation's history we would act to guarantee every single bank deposit held by every single Australian, every single person with a deposit in a bank, a building society and a credit union for the first time in the 109-year history of our federation, guaranteed by the Australian Government.
For the first time in the history of the federation, the federal Government, the Australian Government acting to guarantee the inter-bank lending of our banks so that they could continue to secure lines of credit for the future so that people in small business, people out there needing finance for mortgages could still have access to the inter-bank lending which so necessarily underpins the overall credit supply to Australia.
These two decisions were without precedent in the history of our nation. We undertook those decisions in order to make a difference. To act decisively to underpin the stability of the Australian financial system and this Government succeeded.
Critically also on that weekend I sat down with my colleagues including the Treasurer Wayne Swan as we confronted the unfolding global economic data as we could see a financial crisis becoming a crisis in the general economy, becoming a crisis in employment and in turn a social crisis in so many countries around the world. And we debated how we as a Government, as a Labor Government could make a difference. And that is where we began our national strategy of response to this crisis.
Our mission was this, not to say that we could prevent a global economic recession from having an impact in Australia - that was not possible. But what we could do as a national Government is say that we can stand in the breach and make a difference. We can cushion the impact, we can help workers who would otherwise be being thrown out of their jobs. We can help those who lose their jobs to find dignity through other forms of training. We could act as a national Government unapologetically interventionist at a time of national global economic crisis. And that is what we did.
We undertook a nation-building for recovery strategy in three stages. The first, in October last year, to provide immediate payments, cash payments to pensioners, carers, veterans and others in the community. Why? To provide support to those in need of course, but also to provide necessary and immediate stimulus to our national economy at a time when retail sales around the rest of the world were imploding. As a Labor Prime Minister I take seriously the jobs of the one and half million Australians who work in our retail sector. These are important Australian jobs.
And delegates if you look at what has happened with retail sales around the world in the critical quarters of the fourth quarter last year and the first quarter of 2009, they have fallen through the floor. Millions of people are being thrown into unemployment. This Government by virtue of its intervention turned that around. This Government by virtue of its intervention brought about an increase in retail sales by some four to five per cent compared with more than a one per cent collapse in retail sales in the rest of the advanced economies. If you want clear cut evidence of Government policy at work, it is there making a difference, making an absolute difference.
And if you want to see further clear cut evidence of that policy at work, look at the growth numbers which were released for this economy earlier this week. You are now citizens of an Australian nation whose economy is the only advanced economy, the only one of the major advanced economies in the world which has registered positive economic growth.
All of the major advanced economies are now in recession. Here in Australia we have registered positive economic growth among the major advanced economies, the only one to register positive growth, the fastest economic growth, with the lowest debt and the lowest deficit. That's an achievement on the part of this Australian Government.
And delegates, these things do not happen by accident. They do not happen by chance. They do not happen because someone out there mystically has made things work. It is because we through conscious Government policy have chosen to intervene. 
Beyond those measures, we also last October decided to intervene in the housing sector. Why? Because housing as a sector generates so many jobs in Australia, it is critical to make sure that the wheels of the economy continue to turn. That is why we acted to treble the First Home Owners' Boost. In one step, what we have done is make it possible for so many tens of thousands of young Australians and young Queenslanders to enter the housing market. We have now provided First Home Owners Grants to some 70 or 80,000 Australians in the period since last October when this stream of funding became available.
And the result again is there to see. If you look at the housing sector construction figures for Australia against those of practically any other advanced economy in the world, this is a story of chalk and cheese and again delegates, not because of accident, not because of chance but because the Labor Government you elected decided to act and make a difference.
Friends, that was the first phase of our stimulus strategy. The second phase is unfolding now. Our decision to build and to engage in the single largest school modernisation program our nation has ever seen. Our mission is clear. We intend to turn every primary school in Australia into a construction site, without apology, without fear or favour. Government and non government. Why? We are determined to build the education revolution and we are determined also to build Australia into sustainable economic recovery.
That's what it's about. $15 billion worth of investment in our primary schools to build state-of-the-art 21st century libraries, to build multi-purpose halls. In our secondary schools to make it possible for schools also to have access to state-of-the-art language centres and science centres. Building the infrastructure we need for tomorrow, providing support for jobs and apprenticeships and business today. A Labor Government at work.
The decision we also took to invest in 20,000 units of social housing, the biggest single addition to public housing that this nation has ever seen. And on the way through, undertaking repairs and maintenance for another 50,000 units of social housing which already exist. Why? We are determined to act in terms of reducing homelessness over time but determined to act now also to have an effect, have an effect on the economy by providing another boost to construction at a time when the economy needs it. A Labor Government at work.
Friends our challenge also with climate change. Acting again with a $4 billion investment to make it possible for every owner-occupied dwelling in the country to have access to ceiling insulation so that we can take out 50 million tonnes-equivalent of greenhouse gas emissions and at the same time provide an enormous boost again to the construction sector when it needs it. Again a Labor Government at work.
Friends, what is the organising principle here? What are we seeking to do? It is simply this, our strategy is nation-building for recovery. It is supporting jobs, small business and apprenticeships today by investing in the nation-building infrastructure we need for tomorrow, which brings me to the third stage, the third phase of our nation-building for recovery plan.
In the Budget the Treasurer Wayne Swan announced that we would be engaging in a $22 billion further investment in long term infrastructure projects. In roads, in rail, in port, in high speed broadband. Investing in our universities, investing in our hospitals, investing in our medical research. Investing also in clean energy alternatives for the future including the biggest single solar energy project anywhere in the world. These are the long term infrastructure projects to which this Government has committed and dedicated funding in the Budget and again it is a Labor Government at work.
Friends in all these things we are seeking to make a difference. It is leadership to make a difference. You can choose to sit on your hands and do nothing, you can chose to carp and be negative from the sidelines, you can choose to blame somebody else and hope that nobody notices or you can stand in the breach and act. The Labor tradition is this, when the private sector is in retreat we as Government stand in the breach and make a difference. That's what it's about.
But beyond these things delegates, beyond the actions we have taken to deal with this extraordinary global economic crisis which governments around the world now wrestle with, we have also been taking measures to build Australia's long term future as well. One where fairness is still grafted deep into the Australian soul. One where we're also equipping ourselves with the drivers of long term productivity growth for our economy and dealing with the challenges which face us for the future in the long term as well. Because the mission of Labor is always to look beyond the horizon, to see that which is confronting us in the days ahead and to act in advance and to prepare the nation and our people to meet those challenges.
Friends, fairness is part of our mission. Fairness in the workplace, fairness by getting rid of AWAs, fairness by getting rid of WorkChoices, fairness by doing and acting on homelessness, fairness by delivering an apology to the stolen generations. Fairness by beginning a program on closing the gap between indigenous and non-indigenous Australians which aims to reduce the appalling gap which separates us in life expectancy, the appalling gap which separates us in educational opportunity, the appalling gap which separates us in terms of the security and safety of our home environments.
Fairness for indigenous Australians, fairness for those Australians who have no place to call home, fairness for those Australians who had their redundancy arrangements, redundancy entitlements stripped away from them by Mr Howard's unfair industrial relations laws. Fairness for all Australians. Fairness for our aged pensioners in bringing about these single greatest reform of the single aged pension that we have had in the 100-year history of this pension since it was introduced by Andrew Fisher 100 years ago.
Acting to deal with the recession, nation-building for recovery, grafting fairness again in the legislation and laws of the Commonwealth in ways which make a difference in the working lives of Australians everywhere. But also friends, equipping ourselves for the future, building the education revolution, our long term drivers of growth. Investing in our young people, building our universities, ensuring that our TAFEs are the best equipped and the best serviced of any in the advanced economies around the world. Building new productivity training places.
Julia Gillard's initiative of 711,000 new productivity training places across this economy. An extraordinary investment to lift our human capital and prepare us not just for the recovery but for the skills we will need for the economy long term. Also preparing us with the education revolution, universal early-childhood education for four-year-olds across the country. The education revolution; building this extraordinary modernisation program in our schools. The education revolution computers in classrooms. The education revolution; state-of-the-art trades training centres for our secondary schools across the nation. The education revolution; the single largest investment in our universities that this nation has seen for decades, including making it possible for another 50,000 Australians, young Australians, in particular from lower socio-economic groups to attend university for the first time. A Labor Government at work, acting for fairness, acting for the future.
Friends the challenges are many. Building the education revolution for tomorrow, building our infrastructure for tomorrow, acting on climate change, acting on water to make sure that we're prepared for the huge challenges of tomorrow. But can I say in all this we are animated by one core enduring value, which has been ours from the outset, ours since the Shearers' Strike of 1891, ours since the very beginning of our Party and our movement since the first Labor Governments were elected more than 100 years ago. And that enduring Labor value is fairness; a fair go for all. To make it possible for all Australians to participate fully in our national life and to make it possible for us to build the nation to give every Australian a participation in the nation's full national life.
Nearly 100 years ago, a great Labor Premier of this State, TJ Ryan said in Barcaldine, in his campaign speech in 1915:
“During the past quarter of a century the movement has progressed in the face of all the misrepresentations and all the forces which opponents have arrayed against it. Time and time again members of the Labor Party have been described as visionaries who could accomplish nothing by way of practical Government. With the progress of time however the Labor Party has proved to the people of Australia that it is a party of action, that it can seize bold national ideas and accomplishes what it sets out to attain, resolutely and fearlessly.”
So said a great Labor Premier, TJ Ryan, nearly 100 years ago. Ryan's words echo down the decades to us today. They echo down the generations to us today because our mission is always, consistent with governments of the past of our political tradition and consistent with governments of the future, is to hold high still the vision of a light on the hill. And in realising that vision deal with the enormous challenges thrown at us by the events of today. And for us today there is this extraordinary global economic cataclysm. But to wrestle with those challenges but still to deliver an outcome for working Australians everywhere.
This State is so much part and heart of our national vision and you as delegates to this national conference are so much part of our national heart and soul. You have made it possible for this Government to be elected in the critical events of November 2007, I salute your achievements. And I salute your contribution.
Let us all resolve together afresh for this conference today to fight for Labor's vision for the future, to fight for our Government's vision for the future, to see our nation through this extraordinary global economic recession, to make sure that we are prepared for the great challenges which lie ahead for all Australians and all Queenslanders, and to do so rock solid in our core and common belief that we as Australians, that we as Queenslanders are all in this together. If we are all in this together and if we act on the basis of us all being in this together, together we shall prevail. I thank you.


It is a great pleasure to be able to speak to you today, and I thank COSBOA for the opportunity to address this forum again. 
I have said before that small businesses are the engine of the Australian economy.
That is not just a political statement.
It is a truth based on the quantifiable contribution of small business to our country.
Consider just a few facts:
     * There are approximately 1.93 million active small businesses in Australia.
     * Small businesses make up 96 per cent of all businesses.
     * Small businesses contribute around 35 per cent of Australia's total GDP.
     * Small businesses employ 3.8 million people, accounting for around 46 per cent of total private sector employment.
     * More than 17,000 small businesses are exporters which last year shipped goods to the value of $1.2 billion in total.
These facts underline the importance of small business to the Australian economy.
And these facts are the reason that the Government has been consistently focussed on the challenges facing small business.
And why we have renewed that focus in the context of the global recession  -  to make small business a key element of the Government's Nation-Building for Recovery Strategy.
The global economy is experiencing the worst global economic collapse in three quarters of a century.
The global economy is forecast to contract by 1.3 per cent in 2009  -  this will be the first contraction since IMF records began.
Growth rates around the world have collapsed.
In the first quarter of this year, the average contraction across the OECD was 2.1 per cent.
Only 3 of 33 advanced economies recorded positive growth in the March quarter.
Australia was one of those countries  -  growing at 0.4 per cent in the first quarter.
Australia is now has the fastest growing economy in the OECD group of developed countries.
And we are the only major advanced economy not to have fallen into recession at this point.
Australia is not out of the woods just because we avoided a technical recession.
There will be more bad news to come, with growth continuing to be slow and unemployment continuing to rise.
But Australia has fared better than most  -  because we acted with early and decisive action.
When the global financial crisis intensified in September last year, the Government recognised the severity of the crisis and formulated an economic strategy to support the economy.
That strategy comprised a short, medium and long-term response.
In the short term, the government moved quickly to respond to the immediate crisis in the banking sector.
Our first priority was to ensure that the flow of credit to Australian businesses and mortgagees didn't evaporate as global financial markets collapsed.
Credit is the lifeblood of the economy.
Small business people know that better than most.
Without credit, businesses do not have the cash they need to support their operations and grow their business.
During the financial crisis the global financial system went into meltdown and interbank lending ground to a halt.
Australian banks found themselves unable to raise the offshore funds they need to lend into the Australian market.
In September Australian bank raisings had fallen to just $1.7 billion, down from the $13 billion a month earlier in the year.
As the chart indicates - in October there were no raisings at all.
Offshore markets were totally closed to Australian banks.
That is why the Government took a historic decision in October to guarantee term wholesale funding for APRA regulated banks, building societies, and credit unions.
The guarantee had an immediate effect.
By December  -  with the help of the guarantee - offshore markets had opened to Australian banks which raised more than $15.4 billion in guaranteed funds that month.
In January, banks raised more than $20 billion offshore.
With the guarantee, domestic banks could access much-needed funds to support lending in Australia.
In addition to securing the financial system, the Government has also acted to support activity in the real economy.
As the global economy deteriorated rapidly, the government recognised that we needed to act quickly.
Since infrastructure investment has long lead times, the Government decided to introduce fast-acting measures to directly stimulate consumer demand.
To achieve this we invested $21 billion to provide immediate support to the economy  -  through cash payments to families, pensioners, veterans, and low income earners.
As the chart shows, those payments have boosted the Australian retail sector.
While in the major advanced economies, retail sales have fallen on average by 1.1 per cent since November, in Australia retail sales have grown 4.8 per cent during this time.
This is very important for small business, given that small retail businesses account for almost 94 per cent of all retail businesses across the nation.
As an additional immediate stimulus measure, the Government introduced a $2 billion First Home Owners Boost to support the housing and construction industry.
This has been a significant boost to construction activity.
Compared to the same time last year, before the onset of the global recession, building approvals have fallen by only 16 per cent in Australia  -  and the recent trends has been upward.
That compares to falls of 38 per cent in Canada, 50 per cent in the US and 57 per cent in New Zealand.
The national accounts figures last week proved that the short term measures we put in place worked to support the economy until our infrastructure investment comes online.
As the chart indicates, without the short term economic cash stimulus payments, Australian growth would have been minus 0.2 per cent in the March quarter  -  pushing Australia into a technical recession.
Many businesses would not be keeping their heads above water through this global economic storm.
Beyond the immediate term the government also acted early to support the economy in the medium term through shovel-ready infrastructure projects, including:
     * The largest school modernisation in Australia's history, generating local jobs for businesses on thousands of sites around the nation;
     * The construction of more than 20,000 new social and defence homes, and
     * Providing free ceiling insulation for around 2.7 million Australian homes.
Over the longer term, the Government's strategy is nation-building for recovery.
We are supporting jobs today by investing in the nation-building infrastructure Australia needs for tomorrow.
     * We are investing in major rail, road and port projects.
     * We'll be investing in major clean energy projects, including the largest solar energy project anywhere in the world.
     * We will also be investing up to $43 billion in a partnership to build a high-speed National Broadband Network to finally bring Australia into the global digital economy of the 21st century.
In total $49 billion  -  or around 70 per cent  -  of our stimulus is directed to nation building infrastructure over the medium to longer term.
By the end of the year we'll have more than 35,000 construction projects underway around the country.
This strategy of short, medium, and long term support for the economy during the global recession has helped to cushion Australia from the worst impacts of the global recession.
I welcome the news today that business confidence is on the rise.
The increase in business confidence for May was the sharpest rise in business confidence since 1989.
Business confidence is now at its highest level since February 2008.
There is a long way to go, but this data suggests that Australian businesses can see some light at the end of the tunnel.
We are by no means out of the woods. 
But if the Government had not acted early and decisively, Australia would already be in severe recession and the significant fall we've seen in business investment would be even sharper.
In aggregate, Treasury has estimated that without our nation building plan over 200,000 more Australians would be out of work.
Without government action, unemployment would peak at over 10 per cent.
The global recession has of course had a significant impact on the budget's bottom line in Australia, as it has around the world.
The Australian budget has been hit with a $210 billon collapse in Australian tax revenues caused by the global recession.
This is the greatest collapse in tax revenues in our nation's history and has made a budget deficit necessary in Australia until the economy recovers.
But despite the revenue collapse and our stimulus measures, Australia's AAA credit rating has been reaffirmed since the budget.
And Australia's budget deficit and net debt is lower than any of any major advanced economies.
Government net debt as a share of GDP is expected to rise to 75 per cent in the Euro area, 83 per cent in the UK, 83 per cent in the US, and 136 per cent in Japan.
By contrast, Australia's net debt is projected to peak at 13.8 per cent of GDP in 2013-14, before it starts to fall again as our economy moves into a strong period of growth.
In addition to the Government's nation-building strategy for the Australian economy, we have recognised, and responded to, the specific challenges facing small businesses.
Since the financial crisis began, the government has stepped in with a range of specific measures targeted directly to small business.
First, we have taken decisive action to strengthen incentives for small businesses to make capital investments, by introducing the 50 per cent Small Business Tax Break for capital investment.
This means that when a small business buys an eligible asset costing more than $1,000 before the end of this year, small businesses will have access to a 50 per cent tax deduction.
This is up from 30 per cent deduction introduced earlier this year and extends the period of eligibility by six months.
This is a major new incentive for small businesses, and will encourage small businesses to invest for the future and for economic recovery.
And we appreciate COSBOA's support for this measure.
This will not only have positive financial implications for small business but it will have flow on effect for other businesses.
Second, the Government has also announced tax measures that will deliver $720 million in cash-flow relief for approximately one million small businesses, by reducing the Pay-As-You-Go tax instalments in 2009-10.
Third, the Government also recognises that in the tough conditions that many businesses are confronting, small business owners need access to help and advice.
This is why we have moved to establish the Small Business Support Line to assist small businesses during the global recession.
The Support Line will provide initial advice to small business owners and also put them in touch with specialist advisers on matters such as obtaining finance, cash flow management, retail leasing, personal stress and hardship counselling, and promotion and marketing advice.
The Support Line will complement the Business Enterprise Centre network, which is providing targeted advice and support to small businesses.
Fourth, the Government wants to ensure that small business benefits from the national broadband network. That is why the budget also announced the Government's Small Business Online program to help small businesses seize the business opportunities created by the internet.
Operating online is essential for the economy of the 21st century and helps small business to seize the global opportunities.
Fifth, we are lifting incentives for small businesses to engage in research and development.
The incentive to undertake R&amp;D will be doubled for most small businesses from 2010-11, through the new Research and Development Tax Credit.
This will provide a refundable credit of 45 per cent that is not dependent upon a business making a profit in one particular year. This measure has been explicitly designed with the goal of focusing innovation incentives on smaller businesses.
Sixth, we are investing $196 million in a new Commonwealth Commercialisation Institute to help small and medium companies turn great ideas into commercial reality.
Seventh, I know that many small businesses are concerned about interest rates  -  and the rate at which official cuts are passed through to small business.
As the chart indicates, standard small business interest rates are currently around 7 per cent, having fallen from a peak of 10.10 per cent in August 2008.
But while interest rates for small businesses have fallen substantially, we understand that they have not come down as rapidly as other interest rates.
Over the same period the standard variable mortgage rate has fallen faster - by around 3 ¾ percentage points from 9.6 per cent to 5.75 per cent, and the cash rate has been reduced by 4.25 per cent, from 7.25 per cent to 3 per cent.
The Government has made the case both publicly and privately that it expects the Banks to pass on reductions in official interest rates to all borrowers as quickly as possible.
To ensure credit continues to flow to small businesses, the Government has put in place the wholesale bank guarantee.
The Government has also made available a small business banking complaints clearing house for businesses that believe they have been unreasonably denied credit.
And we will use this information to closely monitor the availability of credit to the small business sector.
At the same time as supporting small business through our nation building and other stimulus measures, the Government has been working on the implementation of the commitments we made to small business before the election.
Over the past two and a half years since I have become leader of the Federal Labor Party and then Prime Minister, I have made a number of commitments to small business.
We take those commitments seriously, and today I want to report back to you on the progress we have made.
First, at this very forum two years ago I committed to establishing a Small Business Advisory Council to give small business a greater say in government policy making.
Today I can announce the detailed implementation framework for the Small Business Advisory Committee.
The Committee will take the form of a panel that will be independent of the government and will be comprised of members who have extensive experience with small business.
This panel will be a strong voice for small business in government.
The panel will be consulted in the early stages of a policy's development, and then as the proposal is about to be submitted for final deliberation.
Next month, the Government will call for Expressions of Interest from suitably qualified people to be appointed to the SBAC Small Business Advisory Committee with the appointment of the Committee panel members to be made this year.
The second commitment I made to you in 2007 was to improve on-time payments of Government contracts.
Small businesses shouldn't have to wait for payments in their dealing with governments.
I can report that since 1 December 2008, all new federal government contracts up to $1 million with small business have been subject to the “on-time payment guarantee”.
That means accounts will be paid within 30 days, otherwise small businesses will have the right to charge penalty interest.
The third I made before the last election was to support 36 Business Enterprise Centres around Australia as one-stop advisory services.
The Government has kept that election commitment and the $42 million program is being delivered.
Building on this commitment, last October I also announced that the Government would provide an additional $4 million for small business advice.
That program, too, is now well underway, with 54 local small business organisations in suburban, regional and rural Australia being funded to provide advice such as preparing business plans and applying for finance.
Fourth, I committed to help small business better access the Government procurement market.
Since coming to power, the Government has issued revised Commonwealth Procurement Guidelines.
These guidelines will improve transparency, better inform small businesses about government contracts and clearly state a balanced approach to risk management in contracts.
The Minister for Finance and Deregulation, Lindsay Tanner wrote to all Portfolio Ministers asking them to ensure that agencies implemented the revised procurement framework so that small and medium enterprises would continue to have fair access to the government procurement market.
Fifth, we committed to strengthen the Trade Practices Act to ensure that small businesses were protected against abuses of market power by larger players.
I can report that the Trade Practices (Cartel Conduct and other measures) Bill 2008 was introduced into Parliament on 3 December 2008.
This bill includes tough measures to crack down on the abuse of market power by large businesses.
The bill introduces criminal sanctions for serious cartels involving bid rigging, market sharing, and price fixing.
Sixth, we committed to cutting red tape for small business.
As a part of our election platform we promised to introduce an optional and cost free superannuation clearing house for small business so that they could meet their superannuation obligations under the choice of fund arrangements with a minimum of fuss.
In our first Budget we allocated $16 million over three years commencing in 2009-10 to deliver on this commitment.
The details are currently being finalised and the clearing house will be operational by the end of the 2009-10 year.
The clearing house will allow small employers to make just one contribution payment to the central clearing house for all of their employees.
The clearing house will manage all of the choice of fund paperwork with the small business employees further reducing costs so that small businesses can get on with what they do best - supporting growth and jobs.
The Government is acting decisively and comprehensively to support economic growth and support the small businesses that help drive our economic growth.
We are also providing targeted direct incentives to foster small business investment.
And we are improving specific assistance to help small businesses to make it through the global crisis.
This represents a new partnership between government and the small business sector.
And it demonstrates that Labor is committed to deliver support and opportunities for small businesses.
The Government cannot turn around ill fortunes for every business, just as we cannot stop the rise in unemployment.
But as a Government, we can make a difference, and we can help cushion the impact of this global economic crisis on businesses and on jobs.
So I encourage small businesses to make the most of the measures in place, and for advisors to pass that message on.
Communities all around Australia depend on the prosperity and success of their small businesses.
And the Australian Government is determined to support you through very challenging economic times.
Because all of us are in this together - whether a business owner, an employee, a customer or supplier, or someone in government or other organisations.
And it's by working through each of the challenges of this global crisis together, that we can make it through and build a stronger Australia for the future. 


It is a great pleasure to be here today with friends in the business community to discuss the common challenges we face through the global recession. 
I thank AIG for organising this event, and especially Heather.
The Government has a strong relationship with AIG which operates in the spirit of open dialogue and regular consultation  -  across key challenges facing the business community including skills and training, infrastructure investment, tax and industry policy.
That dialogue between business and government is essential because it's only by working through each of the challenges of this global crisis together, that we can make it through and build a stronger Australia for the future.
The purpose of today is to continue that dialogue.
I want to discuss the challenges facing the global economy and the Government's strategy of nation building for recovery to see us through the global recession.
And I will be interested later to hear your perspectives about the challenges facing your business in this difficult time.
The global economy is experiencing the worst global economic collapse in three quarters of a century.
It is important to note from the chart that the global outlook we currently face is significantly worse than in the previous two recessions in Australia:
During the early 1990s recession, world growth fell to around 1.5 per cent in 1991.
During the early 1980s recession, world growth fell to 0.9 per cent in 1982.
By contrast, the global economy is currently forecast to contract by 1.3 per cent in 2009.
This will be the first global contraction since IMF records began.
Growth rates in virtually every country have collapsed.
The average contraction in growth in the March quarter across the OECD economies was -2.1 per cent.
And falling growth has been particularly pronounced among Australia's trade partners.
8 out of our top ten trading partners are in recession.
And growth in the remaining two countries, India and China has fallen dramatically over the last year.
Across the developed world, only 3 of 33 advanced economies recorded positive growth in the March quarter.
Australia was one of those countries  -  growing at 0.4 per cent in the first quarter.
In the March Quarter Australia was the fastest growing economy in the OECD group of developed countries.
And we are the only major advanced economy not to have fallen into recession at this point.
But Australia is not out of the woods just because we have so far avoided a technical recession.
There will be more bad news to come, with growth continuing to be slow, and unemployment continuing to rise.
But Australia has fared better than most  -  because we took early and decisive action.
The Government acted early and decisively to support the economy  -  to step in while the private sector was in retreat.
When the global financial crisis intensified in September last year, the Government recognised the severity of the crisis and formulated an economic strategy to support the economy.
In the short term, the government moved quickly to respond to the immediate crisis in the banking sector.
Our first priority was to ensure that the flow of credit to Australian businesses and mortgagees didn't evaporate as global financial markets collapsed.
Credit is the lifeblood of the economy.
Business people know that better than most.
Without credit, businesses do not have the cash they need to support their operations and grow their business.
During the financial crisis the global financial system went into meltdown and interbank lending ground to a halt.
As the chart indicates, the financial crisis caused the price of risk to increase dramatically.
Credit spreads increased more than six-fold during the height of the crisis.
As interbank lending virtually froze, Australian banks found themselves unable to raise the offshore funds they need to lend into the Australian market.
In September Australian bank raisings had fallen to just $1.7 billion, down from the $13 billion a month earlier in the year.
As the chart indicates - in October there were no raisings at all.
Offshore markets were totally closed to Australian banks.
That is why the Government took a historic decision in October to guarantee term wholesale funding for APRA regulated banks, building societies, and credit unions.
The guarantee had an immediate effect.
By December  -  with the help of the guarantee - offshore markets had opened to Australian banks which raised more than $15.4 billion in guaranteed funds that month.
In January, banks raised more than $20 billion offshore.
With the guarantee, domestic banks could access much-needed funds to support lending in Australia.
In addition to help stabilise the financial system, the Government has also acted to support activity in the real economy.
Our plan was simple: to support jobs today by building the essential infrastructure Australia needs for a stronger and more prosperous future.
Our approach to stimulating the economy was to start with the components of aggregate demand and then identify policy levers that could be used to support activity in each area:
The key components of Gross Domestic Product are:
     * Consumption  -  about 54 per cent of GDP
     * Dwelling construction  -  about 6 per cent of GDP
     * Private Business Investment  -  17 per cent of GDP
     * Public Final Demand  -  22 per cent of GDP
In each of these key areas, we sought to identify measures to support the economy.
And we looked for measures that would support the economy right through the global recession  -  from immediate support, to the medium-term, right through to the long-term.
Our first measures were designed to provide immediate short term support to the Australian economy as the global economy deteriorated rapidly.
Since infrastructure investment has long lead times, the Government decided to introduce fast-acting measures to directly stimulate consumer demand.
To achieve this we invested $21 billion to provide immediate support to the economy  -  through cash payments to families, pensioners, veterans, and low income earners.
As the chart shows, those payments have boosted the Australian retail sector.
While in the major advanced economies, retail sales have fallen on average by 1.1 per cent since November, in Australia retail sales have grown 4.8 per cent during this time.
In the March quarter, the consumption component of GDP contributed positive 0.3 per cent to growth.
Second, we introduced another measure to stimulate the housing sector.
The Government introduced a $2 billion First Home Owners Boost to support the housing and construction industry.
This has been a significant boost to construction activity.
Compared to the same time last year, before the onset of the global recession, building approvals have fallen by only 16 per cent in Australia  -  and the recent trends has been upward.
That compares to falls of 38 per cent in Canada, 50 per cent in the US and 57 per cent in New Zealand.
In the March National Accounts, private dwelling construction contributed minus 0.3 to growth  -  a solid result for a cyclical industry in the context of a global recession that has seen construction grind to a halt in most advanced economies.
In aggregate, the national accounts figures last week proved that these short term measures have worked to support the economy until our infrastructure investment comes online.
As the chart indicates, without the short term economic cash stimulus payments, Australian growth would have been minus 0.2 per cent in the March quarter  -  pushing Australia into a technical recession.
Many businesses would not be keeping their heads above water through this global economic storm.
Beyond the immediate term the government also acted early to support the economy in the medium term.
To support business investment we have taken decisive action to strengthen incentives for businesses to make capital investments, by introducing the 30 per cent Business Tax break for capital investment and a 50 per cent break for Small Business.
This is a major new incentive for businesses, and will encourage businesses to invest for the future and for economic recovery.
As the chart indicates, Australian business investment through the year to March was positive at 1.1 per cent  -  and much stronger than business investment in our peer countries.
In addition the Government has sought to boost public investment.
The Government has stepped in to boost the construction and associated industries by investing in the medium term in shovel-ready infrastructure projects, including, the largest school modernisation in Australia's history, generating local jobs for businesses on thousands of sites around the nation, the construction of more than 20,000 new social and defence homes, and providing free ceiling insulation for around 2.7 million Australian homes.
Over the longer term, the Government's strategy is nation-building for recovery.
We are supporting jobs today by investing in the nation-building infrastructure Australia needs for tomorrow.
We are investing in major rail, road and port projects.
We'll be investing in major clean energy projects, including the largest solar energy project anywhere in the world.
We will also be investing up to $43 billion in a partnership to build a high-speed National Broadband Network to finally bring Australia into the global digital economy of the 21st century.
In total $49 billion  -  or around 70 per cent  -  of our stimulus is directed to nation building infrastructure over the medium to longer term.
By the end of the year we'll have more than 35,000 construction projects underway around the country.
As the chart indicates, public investment in Australia is growing strongly.
And the federal government is making up a large part of the increase, stepping in to use our strong balance sheet to support investment.
This strategy of short, medium, and long term support for the economy during the global recession has helped to cushion Australia from the worst impacts of the global recession.
In aggregate, Treasury has estimated that without our nation building plan over 200,000 more Australians would be out of work.
Without government action, unemployment would peak at over 10 per cent.
Today we have seen an increase in unemployment to 5.7 per cent  -  returning to where it was in March this year, although employment remained fairly steady, falling by 1,700.
This data confirms the global recession is continuing to have a direct impact on the Australian economy and on Australian jobs.
No-one likes to see unemployment rise. But we must not forget that even after today's data Australia's unemployment rate is lower than all the major advanced economies except Japan.
While there is a tough road ahead, Australia is weathering the storm better than most economies in the rest of the advanced world.
Australians have every reason to remain confident that we will continue to weather the storm of the global recession better than most other advanced economies.
Among the major advanced economies, right now Australia has the fastest growth, the lowest deficit and the lowest debt.
Overall the government's stimulus will have a significant impact on growth. 
In 2009-10, Treasury estimates that growth will be increased by 2.75 per cent as a result of the stimulus.
And in 2010-11 growth will be increased by 1.5 per cent.
In the last few days we have received some positive indications that businesses and consumers are reacting positively to our stimulus package.
I welcome the news on Tuesday that business confidence is on the rise.
The increase in business confidence for May was the sharpest rise in business confidence since 1989.
Business confidence is now at its highest level since February 2008.
Data out on Wednesday showed consumer sentiment was up 12 per cent in June.
This is the largest increase in 22 years.
Consumer sentiment is now up 20 per cent since the announcement of the Government's first economic stimulus package in October.
The consumer sentiment index is now at its highest level since January 2008.
There is a long way to go, but this data suggests that Australian businesses and consumers can see some light at the end of the tunnel.
We are by no means out of the woods. 
But if the Government had not acted early and decisively, Australia would already be in severe recession that would have negatively affected confidence.
The global recession has of course had a significant impact on the budget's bottom line in Australia, as it has around the world.
The Australian budget has been hit with a $210 billon collapse in Australian tax revenues caused by the global recession.
This is the greatest collapse in tax revenues in our nation's history and has made a budget deficit necessary in Australia until the economy recovers.
But despite the revenue collapse and our stimulus measures, Australia's AAA credit rating has been reaffirmed since the budget.
And Australia's net debt is lower than any of any major advanced economies.
Government net debt as a share of GDP is expected to rise to 75 per cent in the Euro area, 83 per cent in the UK, 83 per cent in the US, and 136 per cent in Japan.
By contrast, Australia's net debt is projected to peak at 13.8 per cent of GDP in 2013-14, before it starts to fall again as our economy moves into a strong period of growth.
And Australia's deficit of 4.9 per cent of GDP is among the lowest in the advanced economies.
The Budget deficit in the US is 13.6 per cent of GDP, in Japan the deficit is 9.9 per cent of GDP, and in the UK the deficit is 9.8 per cent of GDP in 2009.
The Government is acting decisively and comprehensively to support economic growth.
This represents a new partnership between government and the business sector.
And it demonstrates that Labor is committed to deliver support and opportunities for businesses.
The Government cannot turn around ill fortunes for every business, just as we cannot stop the rise in unemployment.
But as a Government, we can make a difference, and we can help cushion the impact of this global economic crisis on businesses and on jobs.
So I encourage all businesses to make the most of the measures in place, and for advisors to pass that message on.
And the Australian Government is determined to do what we can to support you through very challenging economic times.
Because all of us are in this together - whether a business owner, an employee, a customer or supplier, or someone in government or other organisations.


The great thing about Fitz's books is that they are celebrations of Australia. They are part and parcel of the history of who we are and who we hope to become. And the great thing about his writing is it's also replete with the language of Australia and Australianisms. In fact I saw in this morning's press I was criticised for using some Australianisms. And I'd just say to, well I was having a Dad and Dave this morning  -  that's a shave  -  picked up my copy of the Oz and saw, was it George Megalogenis having a go at me and I thought, fair crack of the whip. Don't come the raw prawn with me George. Or coming from Queensland I'd say you'd get the rough end of the pineapple but enough of that.
Before I begin if I could acknowledge the First Australians on whose lands we meet and whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
Today we come together to honour a truly great Australian, in Sir Charles Kingsford Smith. One who was beyond any doubt a person who has inspired the nation's imagination. One who pushed literally beyond the frontiers of our land and in doing so pushed beyond the frontiers of our minds. These are great achievements because Charles Kingsford Smith and his fellow aviator Charles Ulm are without doubt chapters in our nation's story, chapters in our nation's imagination, chapters in the sort of Australia that we wish to become.
It's also an honour today to be launching this book by one of Australia's most prolific writers. I think it is fair to say that Peter FitzSimons has been an extraordinary contributor to Australian writing. I am advised Peter that you have penned 20 books already. This puts you in the league of being a veritable front-rower for the Australian publishing industry and with awards as the nation's best selling non-fiction writer on three occasions in the past decade, I think it is fair to say therefore that Peter FitzSimons himself, in himself is a literary stimulus package self-contained. With appropriate impact on the macro-economy.
Peter's doing important work because he's bringing life to great Australian legends. Legends of sport, legends of war and the great legends of pioneering adventurers like our great aviators.
In particular, he has sustained a deep fascination in Australia over our role in the last World War; his books on Nancy Wake, Kokoda and Tobruk. As a writer, Peter brings to life the personalities behind the iconic stories of Australian history because the truth is we are shaped not just by impersonal forces - political, social, economic - as if we are simply hapless ships in the night. We are shaped actively by the active decisions of women and men. Decisions of courage, decisions which have turned the course of human history. Charles Kingsford Smith was one such man.
Peter's book does two things. First, it gives us a comprehensive picture of the man, Charles Kingsford Smith, from his earliest days in Queensland. Second it recounts, with enthusiasm and extraordinary detail, the birth of modern aviation. The story of modern aviation is itself a remarkable story. As Peter says with great eloquence, in some 66 years we went from being three foot off the ground to one foot on the moon. This is extraordinary when you look at the full spread of human history.
Australia also played an important part in this journey. As a nation, Australia, this nation of vast distances, was enormously changed by aviation. In many respects the aviation revolution achieved physically what the digital revolution is achieving electronically, shrinking time and space and so overcoming finally the great tyranny of distance. Aviation literally re-drew the map for us. It brought us together as a nation, enabling a vast expansion of trade and business activity in closing great distances with flights of just an hour or two. It's something that we now take for granted. It was not always so.
As Peter reminds us in this great history, we shouldn't take the aviation revolution for granted. It is in itself an extraordinary story. That's why we are all captivated by the simple thought of those magnificent men and their flying machines. A great Australian story also of courage, of innovation and nation-building and this transformation has all happened within the lifetimes of many Australians who are still with us today.
For many Australians, certainly those of my parents' generation, it's difficult imagine any person who more captured the imagination of a generation than Charles Kingsford Smith. ‘Smithy' as he was known to his mates and the nation, ‘Chilla' as he was known to his beloved family. He was Australia's greatest long-distance pioneering aviator and in doing so he exhibited great physical courage. Great physical courage. This is something which is written of less these days than it should be. Great physical courage as our veterans from Tobruk and Kokoda know full well from their own life experience.
Kingsford Smith's 1928 three-legged journey from California to Brisbane took extraordinary courage as he and his crew ignored all advice and flew from one geographical ‘speck' to the next. He was traversing what he described as - and I quote him - “virgin air”, perhaps not mindful of an entrepreneur some generations later who would copy the phrase and use it for defined entrepreneurial purposes. Others said he had undertaken a flight that would “stagger the imagination”. And he did.
After a total of 83 hours and 38 minutes in the air, Smithy and his crew landed the Southern Cross in a paddock which was to become Eagle Farm in Brisbane. This was an extraordinary moment for Australians. This conquering of the Pacific brought some 300,000 spectators out to Mascot Airport in Sydney alone. And again as Peter says in his book, eloquently, to bring the same number to the airport today you'd need to land a space-craft from Mars.
Today there are over 120 Boeing 747 non-stop flights flying more than 30,000 people between Australia and the United States every week. How the world has changed. Now, that flight takes around 14 hours, some 69 hours less than Kingsford Smith's pioneering flight.
The nation has never forgotten Kingsford Smith. Charles Kingsford Smith for three decades decorated our $20 note. Our nation's busiest airport is named after him. He was portrayed by the late Bud Tingwell  -  -  Bud's first speaking role  -  -  in the 1945 film ‘Smithy'. And for Queenslanders, the legend of Kingsford Smith has always been in our sights, as we pass by the Southern Cross on Brisbane's Airport Drive, a very physical reminder of those magnificent men and their flying machines.
Smithy's was a remarkable life, hair-raising from the start. Like the day he jumped from the roof of the family shed holding nothing but an open umbrella. How many of you have done that?
Like the day he also decided to join up and serve with Australia in the First World War. Smithy served in Gallipoli and survived. He served too on the Western Front and survived. He clocked up some 800 hours in the air with the Royal Flying Corps and survived. His courage, his physical courage was recognised by the award of a Military Cross for conspicuous gallantry and devotion to duty  -  though he once quipped it was for acts of absolute foolishness.
Smithy could also inspire extraordinary confidence in those around him - a born commander and leader of men, who was fastidious when it came to preparing his plane for flight. Indeed his radio operator on the Southern Cross, Jim Warner, famously said he'd follow Smithy on a tomato crate with cracker-box wings if he said it would fly.
This book isn't just a biography of Smithy. It's also a history of Australian aviation. From its earliest days, when Australians acclaimed Harry Houdini as the first man to fly in Australia  -  provoking extraordinary scenes at Sydney's Rosehill racetrack, with men and women tossing hats into the air and weeping with excitement. Reminding us afresh that there is something exhilarating, something extraordinary about science, technology and innovation, about breaking through the frontiers of possible.
Today, the Australian aviation industry is a $6 billion a year business. It supports more than half a million jobs. It carries more than 25 million passengers on international flights and 50 million domestic passengers each year. In the great tradition of Charles Kingsford Smith, ours also is a Government that believes aviation has a role in shaping our nation's future, not just a part of its past.
We are the first Government to develop a National Aviation Policy, which I expect to be finalised later this year. We have already signed an “Open Skies” agreement with the United States, increased capacity in other markets including South Africa, Thailand and Malaysia, and we are in negotiations for a comprehensive agreement with the European Union. Aviation for Australia does not just have therefore a vital history, vital as it is. It has equally for us, a vital future.
Since the beginnings of the aviation industry, governments have played an important role in supporting and advancing the industry.
I haven't yet read all 700 pages of this book but there have been parts of it that I've dipped into. And one part where my attention has been particularly fixed has been an account of a bit of political deal-making one evening some time after the war to end all wars, when Billy Hughes, then Australian Prime Minister, was returning from Parliament in Melbourne to Sydney on the night train.
Prime Minister Billy Hughes was known as an avid early champion of Australian aviation. Travelling to Versailles for the peace conference after the First World War, and constantly flying back and forth between London and Paris had got our Billy thinking about the great distances that isolated Australia from Europe.
So much so that Hughes announced a 10,000 pound prize for the first all Australian crew or solo pilot who could fly from England to Australia in a plane of British make. Pity about Bleriot and all those other folks. Of British make.
Some time later, Paul “Ginty” McGinness, the driving force in the establishment of Qantas, was desperately looking for government support to expand the fledgling Qantas airline. He'd had little luck with Hughes but he persevered. He was a man of insight.
Knowing that Billy was on the train from Melbourne to Sydney one night, McGinness also boarded the train with one thing in mind  -  cornering the Prime Minister. There were no registers of lobbyists in those days. And McGinness managed to get the Prime Minister in a corner. Indeed, Hughes was willing to cut a deal as only Hughes could.
His message to McGinness was clear and was fully minded of the high policy considerations of the day. And that is, if the Country Party would just stop backing Labor in the Senate, then he would back the airline. And so too a deal was struck, that Hughes would find the money to subsidise a service between Charleville and Cloncurry. And so the deal was done. 
The fledgling Qantas spread its wings through a late night train deal between McGinness, a great Australian entrepreneur, and Hughes who was a person of chequered history in the history of the Australian Labor Party but nonetheless an Australian Prime Minister. And in time, politicians would find also a way to avoid the fateful night train between Melbourne and Sydney.
The life of Charles Kingsford Smith and his co-pilot ended tragically in 1935, when they were declared missing, presumed dead, after the Southern Cross disappeared over the Bay of Bengal. It was a tragic end to a life of extraordinary courage and of extraordinary vision. It was Charles Lindberg's mother who said, on hearing of her son's plans to fly from the United States to Paris, this quote from her I believe speaks down the ages: “For the first time in my life I realised that Columbus also had a mother.”
Today we have two men who did not get to know their fathers. And as Prime Minister of Australia, I honour the sacrifice of your family. The pioneers of aviation took great risks and they paid a very great price. We are proud of them. We are proud of them all. But it was the sacrifice of these great Australians who believed so ardently in the importance of flight to bring the world and its people together which actually made the sacrifice worthwhile.
Smithy's, alongside those other great pioneers of aviation, remains inspirational today as a story for us all. A life brought back to life by this great book by Peter FitzSimons. So well done, mate. Another great Australian epic.
It therefore gives me great pleasure to officially launch Charles Kingsford Smith And Those Magnificent Men and all those who sail in her. This is truly one for under the Christmas tree.


To Gail and to members of the family, to friends one and all of this great man, Chris O'Brien.
From time to time there are those who reach out and touch our souls, who shake us from our inward preoccupations. Who cause us to once again look up and then to look beyond ourselves. And then to realise afresh the simple, yet ancient wisdom of Saint Francis that it is in giving that we receive.
Lives such as these have a single distinguishing feature. They cause the rest of us to change. Chris O'Brien was such a man. Not just great company, of course he was. Not just a diligent colleague, he was that in spades. Not just a loyal friend, he was the best you could have. Not just a loving father, for his children are living and eloquent testimony of his extraordinary love for them. And not just a devoted life partner, because rarely have I known a relationship so tender, so close, so supportive as his with Gail.
For Chris O'Brien was all of these things and as the psalmists would say, ‘pressed down and running over'. But beyond all these things, and any one of them would be sufficient for any other man's eulogy, Chris O'Brien reached out beyond himself and fundamentally changed lives.
He did so of course with his hands, surgeon's hands, hands of great skill. And so he saved the lives of many.
But more critically, he did so with his heart and in a profoundly human and profoundly spiritual way. He did not deny his suffering, he embraced it. And then he deployed it. He sought to capture the nation's imagination on how as a nation we could do better, much better, much, much better in fighting a disease which afflicts tens of thousands of our fellow Australians every year. A disease which in one way or another has touched the lives of practically everyone gathered today in this great cathedral in Sydney.
And Chris's simple refrain was this - we can do better, we must do better and we will do better.
But beyond being the visionary that he was, he was also an intensely practical man. He painstakingly explained to me the first time I met him what integrated or comprehensive cancer care actually meant, or why it simply made sense to co-locate the scientists, the technicians, the clinicians, the carers and of course most importantly the patients themselves because the creativity of this virtuous circle of collaboration would of itself produce the best possible results.
And of course, Chris was right. But not only was he right, he has had an effect. He got inside not just the head of the nation, but the heart of the nation as well. He also got inside the head and the heart of his Prime Minister because of the compelling and overwhelming eloquence of the testimony of his life.
And so what are the effects? Well Chris, you had a big effect. This year the Australian Government announced $1.3 billion for the new National Cancer Initiative with integrated comprehensive cancer care at its heart, integrated cancer care across the nation.
That, Chris, is your life's legacy. Because without you mate, it wouldn't have happened, it's as simple as that. And here in Sydney, the project nearest and dearest to his heart, Lifehouse at the RPA, it will be built. No ifs, no buts, no maybes, it will be built. And the building will start by year's end if I have to drive the bulldozer myself.
I asked him whether we could call this Centre the Chris O'Brien Centre. He flatly said: “No.” I said: “We're paying the bills, so who are you to object?” Again he said: “No”. To which I say today, tough luck mate because this is a conversation I will now have Gail and members of the family and our friends at RPA.
Last Thursday evening, it was my privilege to spend a little time with Chris and his family just before he died. I read to him his citation for his appointment as an Officer of the Order of Australia. Her Excellency, the Governor General had already made special arrangements to confer that honour on him at Admiralty House this week. That was not to be.
I do not know if Chris heard the citation as I read it, but I felt that he gently squeezed my hand as I did. Here lies a man who touched my life. Here lies a man who touched the nation's soul and we, the nation, Australia, are the richer for him having lived and having worked among us.
Farewell my friend.


It's good, very good to be back in Brissy, sunny Brisbane today, when you come from cold Canberra as I do these days. And to be here today with our friends from the business community to discuss some of the challenges we face in response to this global recession. 
Also to thank ACCI for its assistance in organising this event and to reinforce something which Craig said before in relation to the temporary investment allowance, at currently 30 per cent, prospectively 50 per cent for small business through until the end of the year. You might say how did that come about and you might say what is the point of coming to gatherings like this?
Well I was at a gathering like this at the end of last year in Canberra with ACCI and sat at the table with the guys and girls from ACCI and they put this to me as an idea. So that's about how it went, I think. And I went back and badgered the Treasury with it and we bounced it around the table a few times. A bit of nip and tuck here and there but that's where it came from. It came from interaction like this with your representatives in peak industry bodies.
So the purpose of gatherings like this is twofold. One is to engage with you as the men and women of small business and of business in general about our strategy for dealing with the global economic recession. But the second is this, to also hear from you about any idea you have for us about how we can do things better. That is the purpose of being here today.
My simple message today is that there are strong factual grounds on why Australia can be confident about its economic future. There are strong factual grounds which underpin the proposition that Australia is doing better than most other economies at this difficult time.
My central purpose today here in Brisbane, as I have done in Melbourne and Sydney earlier in the week is to present the core economic data which underpins this message of confidence for our future and to outline the core elements of the economic strategy we are implementing which underpins so much of the data.
We all know what the global reality is; the global reality we together face. That the world is facing the worst global recession in three quarters of a century, that global growth is contracting for the first time since the IMF began keeping records. That global trade flows have collapsed and global investment flows have collapsed and the inevitable increase in global unemployment is well and truly underway.
But despite all of these global challenges, Australia is weathering the storm better than nearly all of our global competitors. Bear these three facts in mind. Our economic growth is higher than all the other major advanced economies in the world. Our deficit is the lowest of all the major advanced economies in the world. And our level of net debt is the lowest of all the major advanced economies in the world. It's important to bear these three facts, core facts, in mind.
When Lehman Brothers collapsed late last year, share markets around the world fell off a cliff and governments around the world dramatically revised down their forecasts for economic growth. I said that as a nation we were all in this together. Big business, small business, governments  -  federal, state and local - business and unions, government and the community sector, all in this together. Because if we fight this together as we have been, we can cushion Australia from the worst aspects, the absolute worst aspects of the global recession.
From day one, the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry has played a strong role in meeting this challenge. The Government values its relationship with ACCI and the opportunity for regular consultation across the wide range of policy challenges facing the business community. That dialogue between business and government from our perspective is essential. I know that businesses around the nation are working hard to hold onto their staff and keep contributing to economic activity.
Today I want to tell you as Prime Minister of Australia that I appreciate your efforts. These are tough decisions, they are hard decisions. As Craig said before, for small business in particular, cash flow is key. When you have uncertainties concerning markets, when you have uncertainties concerning how the global economy will unfold in the future, these are tough and hard decisions. But those which you have made in terms of retaining your staff wherever that has been possible, we as the Government of Australia appreciate your efforts because we know it is difficult, difficult out there.
Today I want to outline the challenges facing the global economy and the Government's strategy of nation building for recovery to see us through the global recession. And I will be interested later, as I said before, to hearing your responses and any propositions or questions you put to us.
Let's turn to the data which is with us today. The global economy is experiencing the worst economic collapse in three quarters of a century. If you look at the data which is before us, the data here, and compare what we are projecting for 2009 in terms of contraction of global growth of 1.3, and contrasting it with what happened in the recession of 1991, 1.5 percent global growth positive and 1982, global growth positive at 0.9. And those two previous earlier recessions globally being in fact the low points since the IMF began collecting data back in 1951, you will see in relative terms where we are against economic history. These are, since the period of the data began to be collected, unprecedented times. For the global economy to be contracting as a whole in 2009 is unprecedented since the IMF began collecting data way back in 1951.
The average contraction in growth in the March quarter across the OECD economies was 2.1 per cent. And falling growth has been particularly pronounced among Australia's trading partners. Eight out of our top 10 trading partners are in recession and growth in the remaining two countries, India and China - to the right of your screen - has fallen dramatically over the last year. This of course directly affects Australia.
Across the developed world, only three of the 33 advanced economies recorded positive growth in the March quarter. Australia was one of those three - we are the orange bar on the top right, growing at 0.4 per cent in the first quarter. In the March quarter Australia was the fastest growing economy in the OECD group of developed countries. And we are the only major advanced economy not to have fallen into recession at this point.
But Australia is not out of the woods just because we have so far avoided a technical recession. There are many bumps in the road which lie ahead. I don't need a crystal ball to tell you that there will be more bad news to come, with growth continuing to be slow, and unemployment continuing to rise. But the bottom line is this, as the data demonstrates: Australia is faring better than most around the world, in part because we this Government, took early and decisive action.
The Government acted early and decisively to support the economy, to step in while the private sector was in retreat. When the global financial crisis intensified in September last year, the Government recognised the severity of the crisis and formulated a comprehensive economic strategy to support the economy.
In the short term, the government moved quickly to respond to the immediate crisis in the banking sector. Our first priority was to ensure that the flow of credit to Australian businesses and mortgagees didn't evaporate as global financial markets collapsed. Members of ACCI and business people around the world know better than most that credit is the lifeblood of the economy. Without credit, businesses do not have the cash they need to support their operations and grow their business.
During the financial crisis, the global financial system went into meltdown and inter-bank lending ground to a halt. If you look at this particular chart you will see where the three month bank credit spreads were headed around the rest of the world. That in orange at the top shows a spread of in excess of 350 basis points in the United States. The black line is the UK which represents a credit spread at the peak of the crisis of some 300 basis points. And you can also see where those in the Euro-zone were with three month bank credit spreads as well, peaking at something 150 basis points to 200 basis points and Australia is the white line underneath, considerably south of that.
This was the challenge that we faced. It is the physical availability of credit and the price of credit given the constraints in global financial markets which occurred following the Lehmans' collapse. As the chart indicates, the financial crisis caused the price of risk to increase dramatically. Inter-bank lending virtually froze. Australian banks found themselves unable to raise the offshore funds they need to lend into the Australian market.
Again I draw your attention to the table. In September, Australian bank raisings had fallen to just $1.7 billion, down from the $13 billion a month earlier in the year. As the chart indicates, in October there were no raisings at all. Offshore markets were totally closed to Australian banks. That is why the Government took a historic decision in October to guarantee term wholesale funding for APRA regulated banks, building societies, and credit unions. The guarantee, as you can see again from the slide, had an immediate effect. Remember there were no offshore raisings at all in October, none in November. Once the guarantee kicked in, in December you began to see a recovery.
To help the guarantee, offshore markets had opened to Australian banks and they were able to raise than $15.4 billion in guaranteed funds that month. And in January they raised more than 20 billion offshore. With the guarantee, domestic banks could access much needed funds to support lending in Australia.
It is important also to look at what has happened to the composition of the fund raisings by banks in most recent months. The grey part of each bar of this offshore raisings, that which have been possible of the basis of the Government guarantee. The black part of the bar represents domestic raisings which have been made possible on the back of the Government guarantee and the little bit of white and orange underneath are those which have so far been able to be raised absent the Government guarantee. As you can see, as of the May data there is some emerging sign of some return to normality but my overall point to you is that absent the Government guarantee to inter-bank lending, the pattern that we saw evolve in October, and November and the beginning of September would have continued, effectively resulting in a strangulation of credit supplies to the Australian economy.
That is why we acted. It is the first time in the history of the Commonwealth that the Government has had to provide a guarantee, a sovereign guarantee to inter-bank lending. The consequences for the real economy and the supply of credit to businesses such as yours, however, would have been catastrophic in the absence of the provision of that guarantee. These then are the decisions that we have taken, that is why we believe it's important that all Australians and financial institutions are marching in the same direction.
That is why I believe Australians have every right to be furious with today's decision by the Commonwealth Bank to increase its home loan rate, hindering the efforts of the Government, the Reserve Bank and the business community to stimulate the economy during this global recession. We are all in this together, businesses, workers, government, the Reserve Bank. And today's decision by the Commonwealth Bank runs counter to this nation-wide effort.
In addition to helping stabilise the financial system, the Government has also acted to support activity in the real economy. Our plan has been simple; to support jobs today, small businesses today, apprentices today by building the essential infrastructure that Australia needs for tomorrow.
Our approach to stimulating the economy was to start with the components of aggregate demand and then identify policy levers that could be used to support activity in each area. This is very much the chart that were presented with in the Cabinet last October in working out how precisely we could act by way of Government policy intervention to provide support for the economy in what was looming as a very difficult year ahead, given that the private sector was in retreat for the reasons I described before.
The key components of Gross Domestic Product in Australia of course are as follows: consumption - about 54 per cent of GDP; dwelling construction - about six per cent of GDP; private business investment - critically 17 per cent of GDP; and public final demand 22 per cent of GDP. In each of these key areas, we sought to identify measures to support the economy. And we looked for measures that would support the economy right through the global recession; from immediate support, to medium-term action, right through to long-term action.
Let me turn to some short term measures. Our first measures were designed to provide immediate short term support to the Australian economy as the global economy deteriorated rapidly. Since infrastructure investment has long lead times, the Government decided to introduce fast-acting measures to directly stimulate consumer demand. Remember consumption represents some 54 to 55 per cent of the total (inaudible) economy. It's the place you go to if you need to have an immediate effect.
To achieve this we invested $21 billion to provide immediate support to the economy through cash payments to families, to pensioners, veterans, and low income earners. As the chart shows, those payments have boosted the Australian retail sector. While in the major advanced economies, retail sales have fallen on average by 1.1 per cent since November last year, in Australia retail sales have grown 4.8 per cent during this time.
In the March quarter, the consumption component of GDP contributed positive 0.3 per cent to growth. There is no doubt that without the economic stimulus package phase one that I have just described through cash payments, we would not have seen the positive numbers in last year's* National Accounts.
Of course there are other factors at play but without the stimulus measures we would clearly have fallen into a technical recession. This therefore I believe is an important set of data. Again if you look at the impact of retail sales in Australia relative to the Euro-area, New Zealand, Japan, Canada and the United States there is a clear and demonstrable effect which arises from the direct investment that we undertook beginning in the fourth quarter last year, necessary in order to provide immediate injection in the economy.
Second, we introduced another measure to stimulate the housing sector. The Government introduced a $2 billion First Home Owners Boost to support the housing and construction industry. This has been a significant boost to construction activity. Housing finance commitments have increased substantially, particularly the number of loans for the construction of new houses, which has increased by 42.6 per cent since the First Home Owners Boost was introduced in the October statement of last year.
The recent trend in building approvals has also been upward, following the sharp falls in 2008. Compared to the same time last year but before the onset of the global recession, building approvals are down by only 16 per cent in Australia. That is 16 per cent down in Australia and that compares to falls of 38 per cent in Canada, 50 per cent in the US and 57 per cent in New Zealand.
In the March National Accounts, private dwelling construction contributed minus 0.3 per cent to growth, a solid result for a cyclical industry in the context of a global recession that has seen construction grind to a halt in most advanced economies. In aggregate, the national accounts figures last week demonstrated these short term measures have worked to support the economy until our infrastructure investment comes online.
As the chart indicates, without the short term economic cash stimulus payments, Australian growth would have been minus 0.2 per cent in the March quarter, pushing Australia into a technical recession. Many businesses including a number of those represented in this room, particularly in the retail sector, would have found it very difficult to keep their heads above water through the global economic storm were this action not taken.
Again when you look at the, both sides of the slide, both in December ‘08 when you see the impact of the measures we took, on the left hand side in the light blue, the data without stimulus. Orange representing the actual stimulus having flowed through but in particular in March ‘09 you saw more stimulus flow through, the result again included below the line with the orange bar being that above the line following the stimulus.
The demonstrable effect of these actions is clear in the data. Beyond the immediate term, the Government also acted early to support the economy in the medium term. To support business investment we've taken decisive action to strengthen the incentives for business to make capital investments by introducing the 30 per cent business tax break for capital investment and a 50 per cent break for small businesses. This is a major initiative for business and we believe it will assist in encouraging businesses to invest for the future and for economic recovery.
As chart indicates, Australian business investment through the year to March was positive at 1.1 per cent, a much stronger business investment than our peer countries. Again, if you look at the comparable data, all the other economies are south of the line among major advanced economies, and Australia just north of the line. In addition, the Government has sought to boost public investment. The Government has stepped in to boost the construction and associated industries by investing in medium term, shovel-ready infrastructure projects that we've spoken of so much of in recent times.
Firstly, the largest school modernisation program in Australia's history, generating local jobs for businesses on thousands of sites around the nation.
Second, construction of 20,000 new social and defence homes and repairing almost 50,000 homes. I've come just early this morning from Upper Kedron, a classic example. This is defence housing for our men and women in uniform living in Enoggera. The current program nationwide is to roll out about 1,000 more, extra units of defence housing. With the arrival of the economic stimulus strategy, we've decided to increase that by a further 800 units of housing.
In the city of Brisbane, 103 of those units are being constructed at the moment. The people I met this morning out at Upper Kedron were in fact tradies from all over Brisbane working in considerable numbers on that site. In that particular part of the site I think we had some 40 or 50 houses under construction and I handed over the keys to the Brigadier from Enoggera. This is a program we announced in February. We've handed over the keys for first new houses as of the middle of June.
Given what you all know happens within the wheels of government, that ain't bad.
Third thing is providing free ceiling insulation for 2.7 million Australian homes and this has been of direct assistance to not just the ceiling insulation industry, not just of direct benefit of course in terms of its greenhouse gas impact, but also all the associated industries, transport, manufacture, installation and everything associated with it. All together these measures put in aggregate represent $30 billion or about three per cent of GDP being invested directly into construction, in construction related activity starting this quarter, kicking into full swing in the following quarter, that's the third quarter of ‘09 through until the middle of ‘10 and beyond and then tapering down.
The objective with this and the other measures is as follows; to build the infrastructure we need for tomorrow, in so doing support the jobs and the small businesses and the apprenticeships who need support today.
The school modernisation program in particular is of fundamental importance. We are turning every primary school in the country into a construction site - every one, government, non-government, without apology, 7,500 of them.
Our secondary schools - 500 of 2,500 will have the construction of new science centres or new language centres. In primary schools, 21st century libraries. And in all these schools -10,000 nationwide - injections of funds to support fundamental maintenance and repairs as well. The objective is to support jobs, small business and apprenticeships in local areas now and on top of that build the schools that we need for the 21st century. This is part and parcel of what will unfold in the months and quarters ahead.
Over the longer term, the Government's strategy is nation building for recovery. We are supporting jobs today by investing in the longer term infrastructure the nation needs for tomorrow as well, investing in major rail, road and port projects. Investing in major clean energy projects including what would become the largest solar energy project anywhere in the world of 1,000 megawatts. We'll also be investing up to $43 billion in partnership with the private sector to build a high speed National Broadband Network to finally bring Australia to the global digital economy of the 21st century.
In total, about $50 billion for around 70 per cent of the Government's overall stimulus package is directed to nation building infrastructure over the medium to long term. And by the end of the year, we'll have more than 35,000 construction projects underway around the country, 35,000. As the chart indicates, public final demand is set to grow strongly driven by a record 25 per cent increase in public investment in ‘09-10.
The Federal Government is making up a large part of the increase, stepping in to use our strong balance sheet to support investment. This strategy of short, medium and long term measures to support the economy during the global recession has helped to cushion Australia from the worst impacts of the global recession. In aggregate, Treasury has estimated without our nation building for recovery plan over 200,000 more Australians would be out of work. Without government action unemployment would peak at over 10 per cent.
Yesterday we saw an increase in unemployment to 5.7 per cent, returning it to where it was in March this year, although employment remained fairly steady falling by about 1,700. This data confirms the global recession is continueing to have a direct impact on the Australian economy and on Australian jobs. No one likes to see unemployment rise as a result of the global recession. But Australia's unemployment rate is lower than all the major advanced economies except Japan.
Again, bear this in mind - we have the fastest growth of the major advanced economies.
We have the lowest deficit of the major advanced economies.
We have the lowest debt of the major advanced economies and we have the second lowest unemployment rate of the major advanced economies.
In these difficult economic circumstances it is hard to produce results like this. Government policy action has been instrumental. Actions also, independently by you as the women and men in business have been equally critical.
While there's a tough road ahead, Australia is weathering the storm better than most economies in the rest of the advanced world. And Australians have every reason to remain confident that we'll continue to weather the storm of the global recession better than most other advanced economies.
If we go to the impact of all these measures on growth, overall the Government stimulus will have a significant impact on growth. In 2009-10, Treasury estimates that growth will be increased by 2.75 per cent as a result of government stimulus investments. In 2010-11 growth will be increased by 1.5 per cent. And again, I will draw your attention to the graph and the difference between pre-stimulus measures and post-stimulus measures as underpinned by the data which is in front of you.
In the last few days, we have received some positive indications that businesses and consumers are reacting positively to stimulus packages.
I welcome the news on Tuesday that business confidence has been on the rise. The increase in business confidence for May is the sharpest rise in business confidence since 1989. Business confidence is now at its highest level since February 2008.
Data out on Wednesday this week showed consumer sentiment was up by 12 per cent in June. This is the largest increase in 22 years. Consumer sentiment is now up 20 per cent since the announcement of the Government's first economic stimulus package back in October. The consumer sentiment index is now at its highest level since January 2008.
There is still a long way to go, but this data suggests that Australian businesses and consumers can see some light at the end of the tunnel. And again I say by no means are we out of the woods yet. But if government had not acted early and decisively, Australia would already be in a severe recession and that in turn would have negatively affected confidence, both business and consumer confidence.
The global recession has of course had a significant effect on Budget bottom lines, both in Australia and around the world. The Australian Budget has been hit with a $210 billion collapse in Australian tax revenues because of the global recession. This is the greatest collapse in tax revenues in our nation's history and has made a Budget deficit necessary in Australia until the economy recovers. But despite the revenue collapse and the measures that we have taken to stimulate the economy, Australia's AAA credit rating has been reaffirmed since the Budget.
On debt and deficit, Australia's net debt is now lower than any of the other major advanced economies. Australia to the left of your screen and then you move through Canada, the United Kingdom, the United States, the advanced 25, the Euro area and Japan.
Government net debt as a share of GDP is expected to rise to 75 per cent in the Euro area, 83 per cent in the UK, 83 per cent in the US and 136 per cent in Japan. By contrast Australia's net debt is projected to peak at 13.8 per cent of GDP in 2013-2014 before it starts to fall again as our economy moves into a stronger period of growth.
And Australia's deficit of 4.9 per cent of GDP is the lowest of the advanced economies. The budget deficit in the United States is 13.6 per cent of GDP. In Japan, the deficit is 9.9 per cent of GDP. The UK, it's 9.8 per cent of GDP. I'd say to you all as leaders of the business community it is important to bear these fundamental facts, the statistical data in mind as you confront a dishonest scare campaign on debt and deficit. We have taken these measures consciously to stimulate the economy and I repeat - of the major advanced economies, Australia is now the fastest growing with the lowest net debt, the lowest deficit and with the second lowest unemployment rate.
To conclude, the Government is acting decisively and comprehensively to support economic growth. This represents for us a new partnership between government and the business sector and it demonstrates the Australian Government is committed to the support and opportunities for business. In particular, I'd encourage all businesses to make the most of the incentives the government has implemented during the past nine months. I repeat and reiterate what Craig had to say before, to encourage all of you as businesses to take advantage of the 30 per cent general business tax break for eligible investments that are available until the 30th of June and the 50 per cent small business tax break that lasts until the end of this year. This tax break for investment is a measure strongly advocated by ACCI, as I indicated before, and we would like you as people in business, tailored to the circumstances of your individual business, to make maximum advantage, to take maximum advantage of it.
The Government cannot stop the global recession, we cannot stop the recession causing harm to businesses. We cannot cause the global recession to stop harming employment. But as a Government by acting we can make a difference.
There are two alternative strategies here. You can sit back and sit on your hands and do nothing. You can complain and you can moan and you blame somebody else for events that began beyond our shores and were not controlled by us, which began in US financial markets more than a year and a half ago.
Or you can say and conclude, as we the Government have done, that we have responsibility to act, a responsibility to intervene, a responsibility to make a temporary difference while the private sector is in retreat, by government stepping into the breach. That underpins the economic strategy we've embraced. And to do so on the base of a prudent financial strategy which sees the Budget return to surplus in the medium term and to use those surpluses to repay government borrowings. This has been a responsible strategy for Australia.
I believe we've demonstrated in the past nine months that by working together we, government and business, can cushion Australia from the worst impacts of this global recession. I say again, we are not out of the woods yet. There are still many problems that still lie ahead.
But we intend to maintain this active and dynamic partnership with business to see Australia through. Nation building for recovery, but equally nation building for the future using skills, using infrastructure and the other investments that we make now to support jobs, to support business and to support apprenticeships to use those investments also to turbocharge productivity growth for our economy into the future.
That's the Government's mission, thank you for your support


Thanks very much. If I could begin by acknowledging the first Australians on whose land we meet and whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
And could I also say at the very outset that this is a very good thing that you are doing, News Ltd and Microsoft, because you are in the business of encouragement, encouraging young leaders of today to become our nation's leaders for tomorrow.
One of the lesser known lights of the New Testament - this is not a Bonhoeffer lecture - is a bloke called Barnabas. You've probably never heard of him. But he was referred to repeatedly in the writings as the Son of Encouragement. And in what is often an ocean of despair, the actual physicality of encouraging people, particularly those of talent and ability is of real importance in shaping a person's life.
Not just to reach their own individual potential, but you take that further and to deploy that potential for the benefit of the wider community, the nation and broader humankind.
If we're honest about it, those of us who would regard ourselves as self-made men and women and we reflect on our careers, there have been people out there in the business of encouraging us along the way, small ways, large ways, family, friends, coaches, bosses and for those lucky enough mentors - always seeking to identify that which is good and of potential in a person's life and to show gently, occasionally firmly, but with direction a further way to go. And this is part of what is being celebrated here today.
Because in the oceans of negativity which often pass for public debate in this country, it is important, always important to be building up rather than to be tearing down. To create positive islands of possibilities rather than simply seas of despair and engaging in a fashionable celebration of the same.
To always be looking at how you can set things right, rather than simply wallowing in what's going wrong. That's the task of leadership. And that is why this important event today is being held. Because if there is one single continuing feature in the lives that I've seen described in this event today is that each and every one of them is seeking to make a difference.
Not simply content with the status quo in their own lives or in the professional environment in which they've grown up but a determination and a resolve to get out there and to make a difference, to push back the frontiers of what is known and to go on to do things which are not known but which are needed in order to advantage wider human kind.
I actually read through this list this morning in terms of those who have been part of this Next 100. Astronomers and astrophysicists, nanobot engineers, plant scientists, solar power innovators, bush fire scientists, oceanographers, water scientists, street university founders, youth mental health workers, eye surgeons, depression awareness campaigners, spinal pain researchers, metallurgists, artificial intelligence experts  -  we could just do with some natural intelligence around here; move to the artificial intelligence a bit later on.
AFL indigenous youth leadership coaches, Olympic champion divers, authors, conductors, choreographers of Aboriginal dance. Foreign policy analysts, Asia experts, environmental entrepreneurs, humanitarian campaigners, animal protection advocates, program designers for disabled youths, UN advocates. I just noticed in all this it's also got Alister Jordan, my chief of staff, how did that happen John? I just rang him on the way here and I said “I've just seen you on the list, how did that happen?” Anyway, we'll leave him to one side.
Can I just say this is an extraordinary impressive list of Australians out there seeking to make a difference. And I was taken by one of the references in this list in the science category to someone whose name is Nicole I think it's Kuepper. Am I pronouncing it correctly if she is here? K-U-E-P-P-E-R. Solar pioneer innovator at the age of 24. What were you all doing at the age of 24?
And she said: “It's often easier for scientists/engineers to work on the next bio-drug,” says Nicole Kuepper, a lecturer and PhD candidate at the Australian Research Council Photovoltaic Centre of Excellence at the University of New South Wales. “But there are some simple problems people in developing countries face. And that is how you can have low cost solutions for energy.”
And then she says: “We stumbled on a solar cell manufacturing process involving an inkjet printer, something like nail polish, and a pizza oven that has been deemed to be ‘i-JET cell concept' and I am working on that today.” Well, as you do at the age of 24.
As I say, that's what's good about this, encouraging persons such as Nicole and the other 99 in this list to make a bigger difference for the future.
Which brings us back to the theme that we are here to celebrate today and that theme is encouragement and encouragement for leadership for the future.
What are the qualities of leadership that I believe are seeking to be inspired and encouraged here today? Leadership that dares to look beyond the horizon, to identify the opportunities of the future as well as recognising the threat and then to do something about it. Leadership that resolves to act, not simply to stand idly by. Leadership that seeks to inspire others to follow, rather than simply leaving people behind. Leadership that always seeks to build up rather than engage in the business of just tearing people down. And leadership above all that seeks to encourage the absolute best in everyone else. That is why I'm so pleased and honoured to be part of this event today.
These qualities I believe are alive in the life experience, in many cases quite short, of this list of 100 that has been nominated by News Ltd today. What our nation needs beyond politics, is not just the next 100. What our nation needs is the next 1,000 leaders for tomorrow in every field.
To chart Australia's future, to have alive what I believe should be a vision for the nation. To become the best educated, the best skilled, the best trained workforce anywhere in the world. To celebrate the innovations in science and engineering and design. To honour our achievements, academic as well as in the sporting fields.
And beyond that, for ourselves and our particular part of the world, to have about us a vision which says, let us become the most Asia-literate, China-literate country in the collective west.
And to also in all of that have about us a culture which says, here is a land Australia, where you can have an idea, build a business up from scratch and turn it into a world beater, while never allowing the fair go to be thrown out the back door.
That I believe, these I believe are values which shape our vision for our nation's future. But none of that is possible in the absence of leadership and that leadership and its qualities are being so honoured here today.
I believe therefore, our nation's future is in safe hands when we honour leadership such as that which is being recognised today in this ceremony. I thank you very much. 


O'BRIEN: A short time ago, I spoke with the Prime Minister. He was in his Parliament House office.
Kevin Rudd, on radio this morning and in the Parliament today you were very keen to argue that the entire Opposition case against you and the Treasurer rested on the contents of an email that you branded as a forgery. But you know that that's not the only basis for concern about your Treasurer's assistance for the Queensland car dealer John Grant, who is an acquaintance or friend of yours. You know that that's not the only basis, don't you?
PM: I fundamentally disagree with you, Kerry. Let me go to the heart of the proposition. Mr Turnbull, the Liberal Party's out there accusing myself as Prime Minister and the Treasurer of corruption. What's his basis for saying that? He has said that I have made a communication on behalf of Mr Grant to the Australian Treasury, and as a consequence have caused the Treasurer to act in a way to support Mr Grant's interests which would not otherwise normally occur. That's the essence of it.
So therefore the core of this entire argument rests on the alleged communication between myself, or my office, and the Treasury on Mr Grant's behalf.
And here are the facts: one, Mr Grant has said he's never discussed the matter with me nor asked me for representations - that's true. Secondly, I have not had any dealings with Mr Grant on this matter to make representations for him. Three, neither have my staff. But four, what Mr Turnbull and the Liberal Opposition have said: there's this smoking gun, this email which exists between myself, my office and the Treasury asking for representations to be made. That was exploded today and in terms of the statements I've made over the course of the weekend, because the document in question, the email, is a fake, it's a forgery, it is fraudulent. And we have - we have ...
O'BRIEN: But as you know, Mr Rudd ...
PM: We have the alternative Prime Minister of Australia making an accusation against the serving Prime Minister of corruption, based on this document which is a forgery, and him and his staff using the opportunity to convey the contents of that document around to various media outlets.
O'BRIEN: But as you know, Mr Turnbull also based his charges against you on the verbal evidence given by the public servant Mr Grech in the Senate on Friday where he said - and he acknowledged his memory might be faulty - but he said he had a recollection that an email had come to him from your office about Mr Grant. So that was part of the reason for Mr - on which Malcolm Turnbull based his claims. Another part was a series of faxes involving Mr Swan's office and Mr Grech.
PM: Let me go to the point that you've just raised in terms of what Mr Grech, the public servant, had to say last Friday. You're correct to say that in his evidence he said that his recollection might be false or faulty. Can I also say that after he delivered that evidence, both the Prime Minister's department and the Treasury department conducted independent IT audits to establish whether or not an email had been exchanged between Mr Grech in the Treasury and my senior economic advisor Dr Charlton. Both those searches by independent public service departments found zero.
On the basis of that, I then went out late on Friday, after the news bulletins had gone to bed, and said, "Based on this search I can only conclude that this document is false." But despite that, despite that, you had Mr Turnbull go out there and call for my resignation as Prime Minister of Australia, alleging corruption in my case. And he did so as we now all know on the basis of a forged document, and beyond that, for some weeks had been seeking to convey the contents of this document to news outlets in order to excite their interest. I believe, therefore ...
O'BRIEN: How credible are the sources who have told you that? Has it been other journalists who've told you that Mr Turnbull's been going around?
PM: Um, Kerry, you should know that here in Canberra, the corridors of power and the media talk a lot, and they talk a lot off the record, and this has been one the worst kept secrets in Canberra over the last couple of weeks, this is precisely what's been going on. And for Mr Turnbull as the alternative Prime Minister, and as a person trained as a lawyer, not to administer any basic due diligence to this document, this forged email, and to mount a capital case against the Prime Minister of the day, calling for him to resign, accusing him of being corrupt, shows such a lack of judgment on his part that he is no longer fit to occupy the office of Leader of the Opposition.
O'BRIEN: The Opposition has challenged Mr Swan today on several fronts to test whether he gave John Grant assistance, more assistance than he gave to other car dealers in similar trouble. He was asked directly in the Parliament whether he had personally rung other car dealers to talk about their problems as he had rung Mr Grant. Mr Swan ignored that question. Yet wouldn't you agree that the Parliament deserves that answer? And have you asked Mr Swan why he wasn't prepared to give that answer?
PM: Well, you know, Kerry, we have an Opposition today whose credibility is in absolute tatters because they have made things up. And not just your ordinary garden variety making of things up. Making up an allegation based on a made-up email which goes to an allegation of corruption about the Prime Minister and about the Treasurer. These are no small trifling matters. Their credibility's in absolute tatters.
And you go to this question about individual car dealerships. Can I just quote to you from the Motor Trades Association of Australia. Let me just lay this on the line for your viewers. This is quoting from them, Mr Michael Delaney, the Executive Director. He says, "... the treatment that Mr Grant, a member of mine, got was no different from the treatment of all of my other members on my intervention on their behalf to Mr Grech. They were all treated in the same way and for the same good reason. There was no other way to do these things." He goes on to say -
O'BRIEN: With respect, Mr Rudd, Mr Delaney isn't expected to know everything that passes in private involving bureaucrats in Treasury, or Mr Swan - phone calls, emails or whatever. And can I draw your attention -
PM: Let me go on to a second point on that, Kerry, which is the number of other representations Mr Swan made as Treasurer. He was acting on behalf of representations from a number of members of Parliament. There was some 130, I think Mr Swan said today, emails from Mr Grech to his office concerning these matters over time, a handful of which dealt with the matter of Mr Grant, and there are at least two other car dealerships which involved a greater volume of email correspondence.
Now this seems to be of no relevance to the continued campaign of personal smear which Mr Turnbull and the Liberals are engaged in against the Treasurer. It's time - they had the opportunity today to put up or shut up when it came to providing their documentary evidence in terms of this email. They failed, and in fact the email proved to be an absolute forgery.
O'BRIEN: Well, when the Opposition says that Wayne Swan rang Mr Grant personally and then asked him were there any other car dealers who he was treating equally that he also rang, Mr Swan ignored the answer. He didn't say yes or no, he ignored it.
PM: Kerry, Kerry, you could pluck 1,000 questions out of the air on any day about multiple transactions between the Government, the Treasurer's office and the entire car dealership industry which this Special Purpose Vehicle has been created to support. Remember, why does this vehicle exist, this financing vehicle? Because the industry was in diabolical trouble at the end of last year because of the global financial crisis, and it was intended to support the impending withdrawal of 40 per cent of car dealership finance from the market through the return back overseas of two major car dealership finance companies. It was established as an industry-wide measure.
That is why the evidence I've just referred to then by the head of the Motor Trades Association is highly relevant. It's designed for the entire industry. So you can have Malcolm Turnbull cherrypick one argument or one aspect of this after another as he seeks desperately to cover up for the fact that his credibility is in tatters because of this forged email upon which he's based his attack on me.
O'BRIEN: But Mr Rudd, with respect, it wasn't just the forged email, there was - the imagery that came out of that Senate committee last Friday was absolutely graphic. There was a senior public servant under pressure who was saying things like, "I think, I can recall an email from the Prime Minister's office asking for assistance for Mr Grant." He also said that he had the clear impression that Mr Grant was a special case. And the Opposition is alleging that Mr Swan has essentially got Treasury via Mr Godwin Grech to intercede with Ford Credit on behalf of John Grant as a personal favour to your mate, even to the point of providing Ford Credit's chief executive with Mr Grant's mobile phone number. Now, was that kind of assistance afforded to other car dealers?
PM: Well, what you seem to have neglected in your question, Kerry, was that the same Mr Grech in the same testimony said that his recollection could've been entirely false or faulty. That's what he said himself. It seems to be missing from the general commentary here. The second point I'd make back to you is that in terms of these other car dealerships who are dealing from time to time with the Treasurer's office, there are at least two sets of cases which involved a larger volume of transactions or email communications in order to obtain results. One of - another case related to a car dealership in the electorate, I think, of Kay Hull, the National Party Member for Riverina, who was exceptionally satisfied, I understand, by the service and support she got from Mr Swan's office.
O'BRIEN: But just on that very case, Mr Rudd, I've had a look at the emails that were tabled in the Senate.
PM: Let me go to the question of Mr Swan's character here. That's what you're seeking to go after. And what I'm saying - I know Mr Swan very well. He is a diligent and exceptionally upstanding Treasurer who is seeking to work across the industry here to provide appropriate support in a time of great economic crisis.
And can I say on a day when the Leader of the Opposition's credibility has gone up in a huge explosion, it is remarkable that the Liberal Party can continue to mount a campaign against Mr Swan when, frankly, the senior members of that party, the elder statesmen, Senator Minchin and others, Mr Costello, Mr Nelson, should be tapping Mr Turnbull on the shoulder and saying, "Frankly, you don't have the quality of temperament to occupy this office of leadership of the Opposition."
O'BRIEN: Kevin Rudd, thanks for talking with us.
PM: Pleasure to be with you.


Majestades
Es un gran placer para mi darles la bienvenida en nombre del pueblo de Australia - sobre todo en el dia de San Juan Bauttista.
Las relaciónes entre Australia y España son mas de cuatro cientos años. 
Con vuestra visita, podemos mirar adelante al rediscubrimiento de Australia de los españoles.
Your Majesties
It is a great pleasure to welcome you on behalf of the Australian people - especially on the day of St John the Baptist.
The relationship between Australia and Spain is over 400 years old.
With your visit, we can look ahead to the rediscovery of Australia by the Spanish.
Both our nations are ancient yet modern.
Yours has a rich history stretching back across the millennia of Europe.
Through our Indigenous people, ours is a history of the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
And we share some important history too.
Just over 400 years ago two Spanish explorers  -  Fernando de Quiros and Vaez de Torres  -  sailed to the Pacific Ocean near Australia.
The stretch of water between Australia and Papua New Guinea is now called Torres Strait in honour of the Spanish navigator.
Nearly 200 years ago (in 1821) the first Spanish settlers came to what was then a relatively new British colony called New South Wales.
And before the first Spanish settlers, there were those most famous of Spanish Australians, the merino sheep.
My forebears arrived in Botany Bay on the Second Fleet in 1790.
They beat the merino sheep  -  Spanish by origin, but who came to Australia by way of South Africa  -  by less than 10 years!
So our shared history is long.
It entered a new phase in the 1960s when a new group of Spanish migrants came to Australia.
Like others from nearly every nation on earth, the Spanish migrants made Australia their home.
They brought with them the famous Spanish zest for life.
And they have added enormously to our nation  -  to our sporting, cultural, culinary and business life.
The Spanish community is an integral part of modern Australia  -  a part of that we, and I think Your Majesties, can be proud of.
Australia and Spain share more than history though.
Both of our nations also bring together a modern story of democracy and development; and of contribution to international affairs.
Your Majesties are renowned patrons of democracy, having overseen, for more than three decades, Spain's enduring transformation into one of the world's great democracies.
As modern democracies and market economies, Australia and Spain share a common commitment to advancing human rights, to promoting strong and effective global institutions, and supporting a prosperous, peaceful, secure future.
Our countries have worked together for many years to promote these goals in multilateral institutions, particularly within the United Nations. I have met Prime Minister Zapatero on many occasions and worked with him closely on international challenges.
Australia looks forward to this continuing collaboration with Spain as we live up to our responsibilities as nations committed to fostering new, higher levels of international commitment to tackle the intractable challenges of our times: the global economic downturn, climate change and poverty alleviation.
Australia and Spain also have a shared strategic outlook on international issues.
We are committed to working towards common security goals, including international stabilisation efforts in Afghanistan.
Australia has recently increased our military and civilian commitment to Afghanistan from 1100 to around 1550.
Australia welcomes Spain's recently announced increased troop commitment to Afghanistan through NATO's International Security Assistance Force.
We also welcome Spain's decision to send additional troops to provide security during the presidential elections in Afghanistan.
Just as merino sheep once served as a link between Australia and Spain, it is now our common values and our commitment to making a global contribution that serve as the platform for a strengthened relationship between our two countries.
I'm confident the strong interest Australians have in Spain will continue to grow, particularly following tomorrow's official opening, by Your Majesties, of the Cervantes Institute in Sydney.
Named after the great Spanish author, Miguel de Cervantes (1547-1616)  -  one of giants of world literature, famous, of course, for his literary masterpiece, Don Quixote  -  the Institute will be a great boost for the study and appreciation of Spanish culture and language in Australia.
We are also pleased that so many of your students each year choose to study in Australia  -  they are welcome guests in our country.
The bilateral relationship between our two countries is strong, cooperative and increasingly ambitious.
We welcome that these common aspirations are now reflected in the Joint Action Plan signed earlier today.
Australia is particularly keen to work closely with Spain in the lead-up to your country's EU presidency in the first half of 2010.
Your Majesties, today you are very welcome guests.
Can I conclude by thanking you for your visit, and conveying to you, on behalf of the Government and the people of Australia, the warmest regards of our nation.


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history. 
I am delighted to welcome you back this morning for the second Australian Council of Local Government meeting.
Last year's meeting, the inaugural meeting of the ACLG on November 18 2008, saw the birth of an historic, new partnership between the Australian Government and each of the councils and shires across Australia.
I said at that meeting that you cannot have a strong Australian economy without a healthy global economy.
And you can't have a strong national economy if you don't have strong local economies.
Local governments have key roles in strengthening and stimulating local economies, local businesses and local jobs.
Since last November, the global economy has turned sharply for the worse.
And the impact of the global recession is being felt across each of the 565 councils and shires across the nation.
But in response to the global crisis, the Government has delivered on our commitment to building a new partnership with local government that is supporting local communities buffeted by the global downturn.
Because we understand that the impact of the global recession is ultimately local  -  on local families, local businesses and local communities.
That is why we have acted locally  -  as well as responding nationally and globally, to this enormous challenge.
And it is why our partnership with local government plays an important role in the Australian Government's strategy to cushion Australia from the worst impacts of the global recession.
As a nation we can make our way through these tough times if we work together, and support each other  -  the Commonwealth, State governments, local governments, big business, small business, unions and community organisations.
The OECD report out today shows that Australia has the strongest performing economy in the major advanced economies.
The report also shows that alongside these major advanced economies, we also have among the lowest debt and lowest deficits of any nation.
This report is a big tick for the Government's stimulus packages, and the Government's plan for nation-building for recovery.
Since I last addressed you in November, many of your communities have been through very testing times.
Not only with the global recession, but also through fires, floods and the continuing impact of drought.
For many communities, these disasters are on a scale never experienced in living memory.
Local councils in fire-ravaged Victoria and flood-stricken north Queensland and northern NSW have faced the very toughest of challenges -  - to rebuild communities whilst keeping basic services rolling out through the darkest of days.
In the tragic Black Saturday bushfires in Victoria, 173 people lost their lives and 2,029 homes were destroyed across 24 local government areas.
The impact of such loss and destruction has profound consequences for communities trying to rebuild.
Following these natural disasters, Minister Albanese invited affected councils to reconsider their proposals for funding through the Community Infrastructure Program, to ensure the funding was most appropriate to the needs of the communities.
Against this backdrop, local councils have worked together to come up with innovative solutions  -  like the 134-kilometre trail across Victoria's bushfire-affected communities developed by the Murrindindi, Mitchell and Mansfield Shire Councils.
The ‘Goulburn River High Country Rail Trail' is a trail that will be used by recreational walkers, cyclists, horse riders  -  supporting jobs in local tourism, as well as creating access roads for emergency and maintenance vehicles.
In the Gulf region of north-west Queensland, six local councils have come together to help upgrade the flood-damaged Einasleigh River bridge.
This is a great example of working together and I thank the mayors here today from four of those communities  -  -  Etheridge, Burke, Croydon, and Mornington.
The project to upgrade the bridge will support local construction jobs, while delivering lasting benefits for the community.
The Government's investments in major community infrastructure in disaster-affected communities is both generating jobs and local economic activity, and helping communities get back to on their feet.
This morning I want to speak about the economic challenges facing communities around Australia, and how the Australian Government is tackling these challenges in partnership with local and State governments.
Since we met last November, the global economic outlook has deteriorated dramatically.
The global economy is experiencing the worst global economic collapse in three quarters of a century.
Global growth is contracting for the first time since the IMF began keeping records.
Global trade flows have collapsed.
Global investment has collapsed.
And global unemployment is rising fast.
And falling growth has been particularly pronounced among Australia's trade partners.
8 out of our top ten trading partners are in recession.
And growth in the remaining two countries, India and China has fallen dramatically over the last year.
Last night, we were provided with yet another sobering reminder on the state of the global economy.
The OECD released its latest economic assessment, showing that economic activity in the OECD area is projected to contract by 4.1 per cent this year.
But the news is not all bad.
For the first time in two years, the OECD has revised its growth projections marginally upwards  -  from negative 4.3 to negative 4.1 per cent for 2009.
In fact, the OECD notes that the severity of the downturn is moderating.
There are signs that the slump in OECD economies could be nearing a bottom, following the deepest decline in activity in the post-war era.
The report also notes that recovery is already underway in major non-OECD countries such as China.
But the OECD has warned that “the ensuing recovery is likely to be both weak and fragile for some time”, and that the “negative economic and social consequences of the crisis will be long-lasting.”
Despite the severe slump in global economic growth, Australia is weathering the storm better than nearly all of our global competitors.
As last night's OECD Economic Outlook has confirmed, right now Australia has the strongest performing economy in the OECD, with lower debt and lower deficits than any of the major advanced economies.
Across the developed world, only 3 of 33 advanced economies recorded positive growth in the March quarter.
Australia was one of those countries  -  growing at 0.4 per cent in the first quarter of this year.
Our economic growth is higher than all the major advanced economies in the world.
In addition, our budget deficit is amongst the lowest of all major advanced economies in the world.
Our level of net debt is the lowest of all major advanced economies in the world.
And we are the only major advanced economy not to have fallen into recession at this point.
But Australia is not out of the woods just because we have so far avoided a technical recession.
We know that there will be more bad news to come, with growth continuing to be slow, and unemployment continuing to rise. 
Australia has fared better than most  -  in part because we took early and decisive action to step in while the private sector was in retreat.
When the global financial crisis intensified in September last year, the Government recognised the severity of the crisis and formulated a comprehensive strategy to support the economy and reduce the impact of the global recession on Australian jobs.
In the short term, the government moved quickly to respond to the immediate crisis in the banking sector.
During the financial crisis the global financial system went into meltdown and interbank lending ground to a halt.
As interbank lending virtually froze, Australian banks found themselves unable to raise the offshore funds they need to lend into the Australian market.
In September Australian bank raisings had fallen to just $1.7 billion, down from the $13 billion a month earlier in the year.
As the chart indicates - in October there were no raisings at all.
Offshore markets were totally closed to Australian banks.
That is why the Government took a historic decision in October to guarantee term wholesale funding for APRA regulated banks, building societies, and credit unions.
The guarantee had an immediate effect.
By December  -  with the help of the guarantee - Australian banks raised more than $15.4 billion in guaranteed funds, and a further $20 billion in January.
The guarantee helped restore confidence and underpin the continued provision of credit, which is crucial for local businesses across the nation.
In addition to stabilising the financial system, the Government has also acted to support activity in the real economy.
Our approach to stimulating the economy was to start with the components of aggregate demand and then identify policy levers that could be used to support activity in each area:
The key components of Gross Domestic Product are:
     * Consumption  -  about 54 per cent of GDP
     * Dwelling construction  -  about 6 per cent of GDP
     * Private Business Investment  -  17 per cent of GDP
     * Public Final Demand  -  22 per cent of GDP
In each of these key areas, we sought to identify measures to support the economy  -  from immediate support, to the medium-term, right through to the long-term.
And this approach has had results.
Last night, in addition to the release of the OECD Economic Outlook, the International Monetary Fund also released an updated assessment of the Australian economy.
That assessment noted that Australia's downturn: “has been milder than in most other advanced economies.” And specifically, it remarked that: “This is because of...a timely and significant macro policy response.”
Our first measures were designed to provide immediate support to the Australian economy as the global economy deteriorated.
Since infrastructure investment has long lead times, the Government decided to introduce fast-acting measures to directly stimulate consumer demand.
To achieve this we invested $21 billion to provide immediate support to the economy  -  through cash payments to families, pensioners, veterans, and low income earners.
As the chart shows, those payments have boosted the Australian retail sector, which employs more than 1.5 million Australians.
While in the major advanced economies, retail sales have fallen on average by 1.1 per cent since November, in Australia retail sales have grown 4.8 per cent during this time.
In the March quarter, the consumption component of GDP contributed positive 0.3 per cent to growth.
There is no doubt that without the economic stimulus, we would not have seen these positive numbers in the first three months of the year.
Of course there are other factors at play, but without the stimulus measures we would clearly have fallen into a technical recession.
We also took direct action to support the housing sector with a trebling in the First Home Buyers assistance, delivering a $2 billion First Home Owners Boost to support the housing and construction industry.
The impact of those measures - supported by a record 4 percentage point cut in interest rates - has been reflected in the rebound in housing construction activity this year.
Housing finance commitments have increased substantially.
Loans for the construction of new houses have increased by 42.6 per cent since the Boost was introduced in October 2008.
And while building approvals are down by 16 per cent in Australia compared to a year ago, the fall was more than twice as great in Canada, and more than three times as great in the US and New Zealand.
Overall, without the short term economic cash stimulus payments boosting the retail and construction sectors, Treasury estimates that Australian growth would have been minus 0.2 per cent in the March quarter  -  pushing Australia into a technical recession.
And that would have meant many more jobs lost in the local communities that each of you represent, without that early and decisive action.
Beyond the immediate term the government also acted early to support the economy in the medium term.
We took decisive action to strengthen incentives for businesses to make capital investments, by introducing the 30 per cent Business Tax break for capital investment and a 50 per cent break for Small Business.
As the chart indicates, Australian business investment through the year to March was positive at 1.1 per cent  -  and much stronger than business investment in our peer countries.
In addition the Government raised public investment by investing in the medium term in shovel-ready infrastructure projects, including:
     * our $800 million investment in the Regional and Local Community Infrastructure program with local councils and shires;
     * the largest school modernisation project in Australia's history;
     * the construction of more than 20,000 new social and defence homes, and repairing almost 50,000 homes, and
     * providing free ceiling insulation for around 2.7 million Australian homes.
Over the longer term, the Government's strategy is nation-building for recovery.
We are supporting jobs today by investing in the nation-building infrastructure Australia needs for tomorrow.
     * We are investing $32 billion in highways, railways, local roads and ports projects.
     * We are investing $4.5 billion in clean energy infrastructure, including the largest solar power plant on earth.
     * We will also be investing up to $43 billion in a partnership with the private sector to build a high-speed National Broadband Network to link local communities across our nation to the global digital economy of the 21st century.
In total $49 billion  -  or around 70 per cent  -  of our stimulus is directed to nation building infrastructure over the medium to longer term.
This is nation building for recovery  -  providing jobs for today, and productive infrastructure for tomorrow.
As the IMF noted last night: “The increase in public investment will continue to support activity in the near term, while addressing infrastructure shortfalls.”
And by the end of the year we'll have more than 35,000 construction projects underway around the country.
As the chart indicates, public final demand is set to grow strongly, driven by a record 25 per cent increase in public investment in 2009-10.
The Australian Government is making up a large part of the increase, stepping in to use our strong balance sheet to support investment.
This strategy of short, medium, and long term support for the economy during the global recession has helped to cushion Australia from the worst impacts of the global recession.
Overall the government's stimulus will have a significant impact on growth.
Treasury has estimated that the overall impact of our measures without our nation building plan over 200,000 more Australians would be out of work.
Without government action, unemployment would peak at over 10 per cent  -  the same level as is expected across the OECD by the end of 2010, according to the forecasts the OECD released last night.
No-one likes to see unemployment rise as a result of a global recession.
But Australia's unemployment rate at 5.7 per cent is lower than all the major advanced economies except Japan.
While there is a tough road ahead, Australia is weathering the storm better than most economies in the rest of the advanced world.
Nevertheless, many communities are already being hard hit by rising unemployment.
It is for this reason we've identified Priority Areas as ones that will receive additional immediate assistance through the appointment of a Local Employment Coordinator.
These people will be working in some of your council regions to ensure that communities in their priority areas fully benefit from the significant investment the government is making through the Nation Building - Economic Stimulus Plan.
The Government is looking to you to work with other councils and the Local Employment Coordinators to ensure that jobs are generated for local people in these communities.
And we want to say thank you to those councils who have already offered to host Local Employment Coordinators.
I will expect them to be active across all council regions in their priority area.
But let me make an important point - and this is an issue raised with me yesterday by one our interim employment coordinators.
The effort we collectively need to put in to this massive task is extraordinary.
We cannot go on as if this is business as usual.
For the greater good of our communities, the different arms of government  -  including local governments - need to put aside traditional rivalries and put their collective shoulders to the wheel.
After all, we're all in this together  -  and if we're to be effective in supporting the people in our communities most vulnerable to the global recession, then we must work together in new and innovative ways.
One of the most positive developments in recent weeks is the bounce-back in business and consumer confidence in Australia, reflecting a positive response to the stimulus package and greater confidence in the future.
Business confidence is on the rise, with the month of May recording the sharpest rise in business confidence since 1989.
Business confidence is now at its highest level since February 2008.
Consumer sentiment also rose 12 per cent this month - the largest increase in 22 years.
Consumer sentiment is now up 20 per cent since the announcement of the Government's first economic stimulus package in October, to its highest level since January 2008.
There is a long way to go, but this data suggests that Australian businesses and consumers can see some light at the end of the tunnel.
The global recession has of course had a significant impact on the budget's bottom line in Australia, as it has around the world.
The Australian budget has been hit with a $210 billon collapse in Australian tax revenues caused by the global recession.
This is the greatest collapse in tax revenues in our nation's history and has made a budget deficit necessary in Australia until the economy recovers.
But despite the revenue collapse and our stimulus measures, since the release of the Budget in May we have seen confirmation of Australia's AAA credit rating.
And Australia's net debt is lower than any of any major advanced economies, as the graph shows.
Last night the IMF was unequivocal in its statement that Australia's Budget deficit is appropriate in current circumstances.
It also noted that Government debt is projected to remain low compared with other advanced economies, while also commending the Government's medium term fiscal commitment to return the budget to surplus, pointing out that: “Few other advanced countries have adopted such a clear commitment.”
Further, Australia's deficit of 4.9 per cent of GDP is among the lowest in the advanced economies  -  in contrast to the 2009 Budget deficits of 13.6 per cent of GDP in the US, 9.9 per cent of GDP in Japan, and 9.8 per cent of GDP in the UK.
In focusing the Government's stimulus package on nation-building investment, the Australian Government is investing in building a more productive economy for the future.
The greatest long-term economic challenge for Australia is to turn around the prolonged decline in productivity that we have experienced since the mid-1990s  -  which has taken average productivity growth in each productivity cycle since the mid-1990s down from 3.3 per cent, to 2.1 per cent, and to 1.1 per cent in the current cycle.
Productivity is ultimately what creates greater competitiveness and higher living standards for a nation.
And that's why around the nation we are investing in advanced infrastructure, and in training Australians with the skills and know-how for the jobs of tomorrow.
Our $800 million investment in the Community Infrastructure Program is an important part of our commitment to nation-building infrastructure.
It has been an excellent example of the new partnership between the Commonwealth and each one of our nation's 565 local government bodies.
Last year I asked the Australian Council of Local Government to work with us to get this program off the ground quickly.
The Australian Government identified local governments as important partners in our strategy to fight the impact of the global recession in communities across Australia.
Because local councils can be effective in getting local community infrastructure projects moving quickly, and getting local jobs flowing quickly.
So today I want to thank you for your efforts to date.
Of more than 3,300 local infrastructure projects announced around the country, the majority will be completed by September.
That's an outstanding response.
Importantly, the local governments that you represent have been able to choose the community projects, because the Government believes that it's you who know what's best for your community  -  not Canberra.
I know this has involved enormous efforts, from those in the council and shire chambers, to council staff, right through to the skilled workers delivering those projects on the ground.
But it is making a difference.
As the Australian Government has this year raised Commonwealth funding for local government to its highest level in history, this has flowed through to local communities around the nation.
Town halls, community centres, sports grounds, swimming pools and libraries are all being built, expanded or upgraded.
There are many projects I could highlight today.
Projects which are creating jobs and which are making a real difference in communities.
Projects such as the building of a new grandstand in Renmark, in South Australia's Riverland region.
The local Mayor of Renmark Paringa Council, Neil Martinson, who is here today, says it's a project that's been great for both the local economy and the community  -  a community that has been battling with drought and water restrictions which have resulted in a downturn in construction activity.
Projects like this don't only meet the longer term needs of communities - they also strengthen the capacity of local communities to weather the global recession.
This is why in addition to the $800 million for the Community Infrastructure Program, today I announce a further investment of $220 million in local community infrastructure.
All councils and shires will benefit from this funding.
Of this funding, $100 million will be allocated between all councils and shires.
A minimum of $30,000 will be given to each council.
Additional amounts will be paid to larger communities that qualify for a further growth component.
The remaining $120 million will be available to fund larger Strategic Projects, through a competitive process.
The previous Strategic Projects program attracted almost four times as many applications as we were able to fund, with many high quality proposals put forward.
The process for delivering this $220 million boost to local community infrastructure, which was provided for in the 2009-10 Budget, will commence towards the end of this year.
This additional funding will further assist local government as further waves of the global recession break upon our shores.
In addition to this infrastructure funding, the Government understands the cash-flow challenges councils face with revenue streams hit by the global recession.
And it is for this reason that we have brought forward nearly $480 million in Financial Assistance Grants from the first quarter of the 2009-10 financial year to June.
Finally, today I announce the creation of a $25 million Local Government Reform Fund.
This Fund will assist local councils and shires in implementing nationally agreed frameworks for asset management and financial planning  -  matters that I spoke about last November.
The Fund will also support reforms to council operations through greater cooperation and collaboration. 
All up, this new funding I have announced today brings the Australian Government's total investment in local community infrastructure to just over $1 billion.
The $1 billion partnership between the Commonwealth and local governments is playing an important role in cushioning local communities from the full impact of the worst global recession in 75 years.
More than that, we are embarking on a fundamental reform of our Federation  -  proving that we can end the blame game and bring the resources and expertise of each level of government to work together more effectively than in our nation's past.
That's why we're here today for the Australian Council of Local Government, and why this historic partnership is so important.
We face many challenges with many fiscal, economic, social and environmental dimensions.
But in facing these challenges, we are all in this together.
And together, we can build a stronger and fairer nation, more capable of tackling the great challenges that lie ahead for Australia.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
Amici.
Vi ringrazio per l'invitazione gentile stasera.
L'Australia non sarebbe il paese che è senza italiani!
Lunedì vado in Italia: dove dirò io, che l'Australia sta unita con l'Italia, unita per l'Abruzzo!
TRANSLATION:
Friends.
Thank you for the kind invitation this evening.
Australia wouldn't be the country it is without Italians!
On Monday I am going to Italy: where I will say that Australia stands together with Italy, united for Abruzzo!
I am delighted to be here tonight, especially so close to my departure for Italy.
Melbourne is one of the great cities of the world and I have no doubt part of the secret lies in the sophisticated cultural imprint your community has made here.
Italian culture has permeated so much through our kitchens, restaurants, clubs, and sports grounds that it is sometimes hard to know where Australia ends and Italy begins.
When you travel around the world it seems there are only two counties that can produce a decent coffee  -  -  and they are Australia and Italy!
It's difficult to picture now, so deep is Melbourne's love affair with coffee, but the first café to boast an espresso machine in the 1950s had crowds of tea-drinking locals queuing on the footpath to watch the quirky, steaming contraption in action.
Now in 2009, we are so at home with Italian food that we have taken a few liberties with some Italian culinary staples.
I am informed by the highest sources in the land that on the hit cooking show Master Chef the beloved Italian dessert Tiramisu was given a good Aussie make-over and turned into “Beeramisu” using chocolate stout.
It was a travesty for some, but a true cultural hybrid for others!
Perhaps no event has given Australians a better understanding of Italian culture than the 2006 World Cup ... as much as we claim it was a daylight robbery.
Apart from Cathy Freeman's final in the 2000 Olympics, no other event united Australians more than our team's win to qualify for the 2006 World Cup, and our subsequent games in Germany.
Now we understand why phones are left off the hook, why cafes shut, and why people take leave from work during the World Cup.
It's because Australians now love the world game too  -  almost as much as Italians do.
And we enjoy winning too.
I am probably getting into sensitive territory here with those of you who support Italy over Australia in the World Cup.
Perhaps I shouldn't mention that Socceroos Coach Pim Verbeek's target at next year's World Cup is to take Australia to the quarter-finals and improve on their performance in Germany three years ago.
Perhaps I won't quote late Australian legend Johnny Warren who famously once said that his country should stop wondering whether they would qualify for World Cups and instead should ask when they would start winning them.
Whoever we support in next year's World Cup, we all love the game, and we all agree that the World Cup should come to Australia.
Before I visit Italy, I will drop in on the President of FIFA, Sepp Blatter, in Zurich and explain to him what a fabulous venue Australia would be for the World Cup in 2018 or 2022.
And we all agree that when the World Cup is in Australia the Italian team  -  the Azzurri  -  will have a rapturous welcome here.
Football aside, it is clear that Italy and Australia are great friends.
Australia is rightly proud of its Italian heritage.
Nearly one million Australians claim Italian ancestry.
Nearly 200,000 Australians were born in Italy, while some 30,000 Australians live in Italy.
Italians have built a vibrant community  -  a community that continues its strong tradition of contributing to all aspects of our national life.
Your community here tonight helps to maintain the strong and vibrant link between Australia and Italy.
Now our two nations are looking to further develop our relationship.
That is one of the reasons I am travelling to Italy next week.
I will be attending international climate change meetings that coincide with Italy's hosting of the Group of Eight  -  the G8  -  meetings in L'Aquila; the very region where the earthquake struck in April.
And I look forward to meeting again with Prime Minister Berlusconi and working on the common challenges we face.
Australia and Italy have many common aspirations and we can work together  -  be it bilaterally, regionally and globally  -  to achieve our shared goals.
Australia and Italy have strong historic ties and frequent high level contact. 
I have spoken to Prime Minister Berlusconi on the phone a number of times this year and we worked closely together at the G20 Summit in London in April.
The Foreign Minister, Stephen Smith, is also in frequent contact with his counterpart, Franco Frattini.
We have close ties between Italy and Australia in trade and investment.
Our cultural and educational links continue to grow.
And we work together on many international challenges.
Certainly we are both working to promote stability and security in Afghanistan
We have shared views on the big question of nuclear disarmament.
Italy's Former Foreign and Defence Minister Mr Antonio Martino is on the Advisory Board of the International Commission on Nuclear Non-proliferation and Disarmament we established.
Italy is an important partner for Australia in engaging with Europe through our Australia-EU Partnership Framework.
We also have a strong history of Science and Research collaboration.
And during my visit next week we will take the next step in that collaboration when Australia and Italy sign an agreement to provide for cooperation on the international Square Kilometre Array project  -  a cutting edge global project to build a group of radio telescopes to help us look into the deepest history of the universe.
For us, having the home of Galileo Galilei on our side would be very important!
And we are working together on the great challenge of climate change.
I am delighted that Italy is a founding member of the Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute that Australia has established.
Together we will work with other international partners on commercialising and deploying this critical technology to reduce carbon emissions.
All these links are important and bode well for the future.
But what makes two countries true friends are the personal connections between people.
Connections between friends and families.
That is the bedrock of modern Australia-Italy relations.
And when one of our countries has been dealt a terrible blow, the other is there to help.
It's what friends do.
It's why we are here tonight.
Australia was shocked by the horrific earthquake that hit the Abruzzo region and devastated L'Aquila on 6 April.
For many in Australia, this was not a natural disaster affecting nameless people in a far off land.
This was something far closer to home.
This disaster affected friends and family.
Because a significant number of Italo-Australians come from the Abruzzo region.
This disaster was as keenly felt, the losses as deeply mourned as a natural calamity on our own shores.
I called Prime Minister Berlusconi at the time to pass on the condolences of the people of Australia.
He warmly received Australia's offer to assist with the effort to rebuild L'Aquila.
You should be rightly proud of the efforts by the community here in Melbourne to support the people of Abruzzo.
It is a testament to the strength and generosity of our community.
It shows our strong commitment to maintaining vibrant people-to-people links between Australia and Italy.
I am delighted to be Patron of the Australia-Abruzzo Earthquake Appeal Fund.
I am especially appreciative of the National and State Committees' efforts to mobilise community support and raise funds to help the people of the region.
Just three weeks after the earthquake struck, Nicoletta and Ubaldo and others in the National Committee organised a radio-a-thon on Rete Italia, the national Italian radio station, and raised $300,000 in one weekend.
That was an outstanding effort!
The state community organisations have been working non-stop to raise money and fundraising events are still taking place as I speak.
I know many of you are listening on Rete Italia tonight to the live broadcast of this event.
I thank you sincerely for your efforts.
And I want to say that you are not alone in wanting to help the people of Abruzzo.
Where you make such an effort, the Government should also pitch in.
That is why I have decided that we will match the Italian community's fundraising efforts dollar-for-dollar up to a level of $1.5 million.
Next week I will have the privilege of visiting L'Aquila to see first-hand the consequences of the devastation of 6 April.
I will carry with me, on your behalf, a message of solidarity, support and goodwill  -  to the Abruzzesi and to their future.
I congratulate Nicoletta and the other organisers of this event, and thank all those attending for their generosity and commitment to helping with the reconstruction in Abruzzo and wish you all an enjoyable evening.


Teachers, can I just at the very outset salute the work that you do in these communities, it's appreciated by the nation. To you the mums and dads who support school communities like this as well and to you the Australians of today and the Australians of tomorrow, boys and girls, students here at these great schools.
You may have seen the Premier and I arrive by helicopter. It's one of those great privileges that you have as Prime Minister of Australia, an opportunity to look at some of the great achievements that have been made in the past in our country. And as Prime Minister to think about how we can build on those achievements for the future. And that's what we've been doing this morning.
This morning I saw firsthand the spectacular majesty of the landscape of the Kimberleys. This is truly a unique part of God's creation. It inspires the soul. It is truly, truly a part of our Australian national soul. And as I travelled up The Ord to the dam I also reflected upon the equal antiquity of the Aboriginal people who have been custodians of these lands since the Dreamtime and how honoured we are to share these lands with them.
I also saw firsthand the achievements of those who have gone before us, those who had the imagination, the courage, the fortitude to say we can take this part of the land and turn it into a great, great agricultural development for the future. And going back many years to previous Premiers and previous Prime Ministers of all sides of politics, back to the 40s, through the 50s, into the 60s and the construction of the dam in 1972, what has happened with Ord River Stage One and what will now happen with Ord River Stage Two, you have here us building on the achievements of those who have gone before us.
It was for me an inspiring morning. Seeing the landscape, reflecting on the antiquity of our Indigenous Australians and reflecting also on the great achievements of those who have built this district into what it has become; a major food basket for the country.
As the Premier indicated before we are here today to sign a historic agreement. The Australian Government's vision for the East Kimberley is to help build strong and sustainable communities. It's about providing the social infrastructure that underpins vibrant community life, it's about a partnership between governments and the local community. It's about a partnership with Indigenous communities as we work to close the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians in health, in education, in employment and in life opportunities.
In this respect, I note that the Ord project, and the investments that come with it, have only been possible because of the consent of the Miriuwung and Gajerrong traditional owners. And I thank them for that. I would like to acknowledge here former Minister Eric Ripper and the traditional owners for the extensive work they have done.
I now turn to the specific details of the East Kimberley Development package that we are announcing today.
Firstly in the area of health, the Australian Government will invest $50 million in health services in the region. This includes $20 million for the expansion of the Kununurra Hospital, which serves the whole region. $3.4 million for the Wyndham health facilities, $7 million for remote clinics and aged care facilities and $4 million for short stay patient accommodation.
We will also commit to $6.8 million for environmental health measures  -  including improvements to dust control, incinerators and the fencing of sewerage ponds and rubbish tips. This is in addition to the 8.6 million of funding announced in the Commonwealth Budget for renal dialysis services in the Kimberley as well.
Each of these health measures I have announced today will complement the National Partnership on Indigenous Health, a $1.6 billion investment over four years, that commenced this week. And that aims to reduce the biggest risk factors for disease, to improve chronic disease management and to expand the capacity of the health workforce.
Education. The quality of education training is of fundamental importance to this region's future. If we are to retain families and retain the young people in this region, they must have quality educational opportunities from pre-school right through to Year 12 and to TAFE. And I know this is a priority for this community. And that is why the Australian Government will now be investing $64 million in education and training in the East Kimberley.
This will include $25 million for a new primary school in Kununurra, $15 million for the Kununurra District High School where we stand today, $5 million for the Kununurra School Community Library and $10 million for trades training and classrooms at the Kimberley TAFE.
We are also providing funding for teacher training and for early learning centres in Wyndham, Warmun and Mandangala.
The measures I have announced here will complement the work by the Deputy Prime Minister, Julia Gillard, that she's now undertaking for a Kimberley-wide regional education strategy in partnership with the State Government. That strategy will address the need for improved early childhood education, better outcomes as well as helping particularly the needs of our local Indigenous people.
Housing. We need improved housing, also essential for the region's future. Affordable housing is a challenge for the whole East Kimberley region, especially in attracting and retaining workers in hospitals and schools. Housing problems are especially acute in Indigenous communities in this region, where there's an average of 6.3 residents in each house. This compares to 3.9 residents per house in Indigenous communities overall across the State.
That's why the Government is committed to taking action with a $50 million investment in social and transitional housing in the region. In addition, we will invest a further $5 million in the region specifically to provide housing for health service providers.
In transport, the Development Package we announce today also embraces an investment of more than $15 million in transport infrastructure, including $10 million investment in the Wyndham Port, to expand future trade opportunities.
And finally community facilities; the Government will also invest in community facilities that contribute to stronger community life. $3 million for the hostel oval in Kununurra, $950,000 for the Wyndham pool and funding for a community jetty, also at Wyndham.
Ladies and gentlemen boys and girls, these are the details of what we're about to agree to with the state government of Western Australia here today. These are our investments long term for your community. It's health facilities, it's education facilities, it's training facilities. The things that are important for community life as well as housing, as well as transport.
The State Government and the Australian Government have worked very closely on this project together. The State Government is also investing a comparable amount of money. Altogether we are investing together some $400 million in order to make Ord Stage Two possible, not just as an economic development but also underpinning the social investments which are necessary to make it all work. I believe our two governments have worked well together on this and I think we have also worked speedily.
I first came here six months ago and I sat down with the Premier then and we started nutting through the detail. And since then on my part, Gary Gray the Parliamentary Secretary for Western and Northern Australia and on his part Brendon Grylls the Minister for Regional Development sat down and resolved the detail. And after six months you know something? Having worked in Government for a little while, that's not bad and what we're starting today, the finality of that agreement.
One of the challenges that lies with you as the community is to make it work. We as governments are putting our best step forward in order to ensure that we have a strong economy here for the future and the best investments possible in our schools and in our hospitals. But we need you the community to also take ownership of this with us.
I think in this part, this wonderful part of Australia, we have an enormous opportunity to demonstrate the Australia of which we sang just before in our National Anthem. Its opening line is ‘Australians all let us rejoice', ‘Australians all let us rejoice'. This provides further and great and new opportunities for all Australians, Indigenous and non-Indigenous, in this wonderful part of Australia to carve out a new future. There will be problems, there will be challenges, there will be difficulties, I understand that, no-one waves magic wands. But can I say with Government in partnership with the community and with you the community in partnership with us, I believe we can make a real difference for the future.
To conclude where the Premier concluded, to each of the young people out here today from the littlies to the biggies. Those of you who are thinking about what you might do in the future, look back on this day in 25, in 50 years time and reflect on the fact that you were here for this important new turning point for this region's future. For your district's future.
This wonderful community which you share now will become bigger, greater and even better in the years ahead. Many of you will shape its future as you grow up and choose careers in this part of Australia. So look back in a few years time, in five years time, in 10 years time that you were here at this important milestone because I think it is a milestone of which you'll all be proud.
To teachers, to parents and to those who sustain community life here can I also say this. You are the lifeblood that makes all this work, you actually make communities tick, you actually are the fabric which holds it all together, the glue during the hard times, the difficult times. The economy might be down and markets are bad but you make it work. And to each of you who have committed yourselves to making this a truly great Australian community for the future, I commend you.
So let's celebrate together this new milestone for the future, one of partnership between the Australian Government, the State Government of Western Australia and this great community in the East Kimberley. I thank you.
[Ends]


Berlin is a truly global city.
It symbolises both Germany's critical role in Europe.
And Germany's stature as a global economic power.
Germany is the world's largest exporting nation.
Germany is the world's fourth-largest economy.
Germany's economic development since the devastation of the war has been a remarkable national achievement.
It has been accompanied by strong German engagement on the international challenges we face.
Germany is a strong and active participant in the councils of the United Nations.
A driver of European integration.
And a critical global partner in the fight against international terrorism.
Modern Berlin symbolises the modern world we all share  -  a truly globalised world  -  a globalised world full of challenges and opportunities.
And to manage these challenges and to maximise these opportunities, we need global policies and governance structures that reflect the realities and the complexities of the modern world.
The global economy is currently in the midst of the fourth great global economic crisis of the last 100 years. 
Two of these global crises occurred in the context of world wars.
And two occurred in peacetime  -  the Great Depression and, three quarters of a century later, the global economic crisis that confronts us all today. 
Both peacetime crises had their roots in an asset price boom caused by loose monetary policy, regulatory failures, and excessive leverage. 
It is worth comparing some of the metrics arising from both crises to fully comprehend the dimensions of the challenge we face today.
Take for example a comparison of the twelve months since the recent peak of world output in April 2008 with the twelve months following the 1920's peak in June 1929.
In the twelve months since April 2008, global stock markets have fallen by more than 40 per cent. 
In the twelve months of the Great Depression, global stock markets fell by just over 20 per cent. 
Global trade fell by 17 per cent in the first twelve months of the current global recession, compared to a 10 per cent fall in the first twelve months of the Great Depression. 
Global industrial output fell by around 13 per cent in the first twelve months of the current global recession  -  almost identical to the fall experienced in the first twelve months of the Great Depression. 
On these metrics at least, the current economic crisis has in some critical respects been of a comparable magnitude to the challenge faced three quarters of a century ago. 
But there is one difference between now and 1929, and that is the aggressive and coordinated policy response of global governments led by the G20. 
Decisive action by the world's major economies, coordinated by the G20, has prevented this crisis resulting in the prolonged and deep decline in economic activity that the world experienced in the 1930s: 
Unlike the experience of the 1930s, where economic policy settings were initially tightened in many countries, G20 members have rapidly implemented unprecedented macroeconomic stimulus to restore global economic growth. 
In the first twelve months of the current crisis, many of the world's central banks reduced official interest rates to less than one per cent. By comparison, in the Great Depression it took 24 months for official interest rates to reach their lowest point. 
Fiscal stimulus measures alone by G20 members since the crisis began are expected to amount to $US5 trillion by the end of 2010  -  nearly 8 per cent of global GDP. And IMF research indicates that this stimulus has been 50 per cent more effective because it has been coordinated across countries. In the 1930s, governments contracted rather than expanded their economic activity, thereby compounding the collapse in the private economy.
Further, cooperation in the G20 has helped the world resist beggar thy neighbour policies in trade and finance. In Washington G20 leaders committed to a tariff standstill. While the WTO has identified some slippage, overall it reports that the international community is holding to this, thereby saving the world from a repeat of the tit-for-tat protectionism that choked off recovery in the 1930s. 
G20 Leaders also agreed on measures to stabilise their financial systems and restore credit flows, taking decisive steps to restore the health of their financial systems by dealing with impaired assets, recapitalising their banks, and ensuring that financial institutions could support the lending required to sustain the economic recovery. Reinforcing this is a globally coordinated series of specific regulatory reforms that will underpin stronger and more integrated systems in the future  -  also critical to restore global confidence given the carnage wrought by free-market mayhem in financial markets in the lead up to the catastrophic events of 2007/8.
A further outcome from the London Summit was the agreement to support developing countries by strengthening the resources of the International Financial Institutions. Leaders committed to make an additional $US500 billion available to the IMF and to support a $US250 billion allocation of Special Drawing Rights which will boost the foreign exchange reserves of all countries. No comparable global institution existed or was deployed in the 1930s.
These coordinated and substantial policy responses have contributed to the recent rise in global consumer and business confidence.
They have also supported the first tentative signs of global economic recovery.
Financial markets have stabilised, with financial stocks in the Standard &amp; Poor's 500 Index increasing 35 percent during the second quarter - the index's biggest quarterly advance since 1989.
The IMF has indicated that it will revise up its forecast for the global recovery, from 1.9 per cent to 2.4 per cent in 2010.
Likewise, just last month, the OECD upgraded its growth forecast for the OECD area, its first upward revision in two years. 
These so-called “green shoots” are a welcome respite from the relentless months of bad news that preceded them. 
But they are not a reason for complacency.
We are by no means out of the woods yet.
A global crisis of the magnitude of the current global economic crisis presents two great challenges. 
First, the immediate challenge has been to put a floor under the downward trajectory of both confidence and real economic activity. 
For the last nine months the world has been focussed on this immediate challenge.
So far, this has been successfully prosecuted by national governments and underpinned by the active coordination of the G20.
However, the second great challenge of an economic crisis  -  potentially even more complex than the efforts to address the fall  -  is the challenge to build a sustainable path back to recovery. 
In the late 1930s, the trajectory of global recovery was long, painful and prone to setbacks. 
Global industrial output did not bottom out until 36 months after the crisis began. 
And global industrial output did not return to its 1929 levels until nearly nine years later. 
The scale of wealth destruction and credit market dislocation retarded the recovery and led to nearly a decade of below trend growth. 
Arguably, the recovery period, marked as it was by high unemployment and unstable growth, was more damaging than the initial years of the crisis. 
Today, as we gradually move from the first phase of the financial crisis into the second, we must remember that the challenge of recovery could be at least as great as the challenge of the crisis itself at its absolute height at the end of 2008. 
Furthermore, the challenge of the recovery is now even more complex than it was in the past due to the exponential globalisation of economic activity, turbocharged by the growth in financial flows, financial assets and the new technologies underpinning the intricate interdependencies of global financial markets. 
The rapid globalisation of financial assets has been remarkable.
The value of global financial assets grew from less than 100 per cent of GDP in 1990 to nearly 400 per cent in 2007. 
Foreign investors own one in three government bonds around the world, up from just one in nine in 1990. 
One in four equities and one in five private debt securities is now held by a foreign investor, triple the level in 1990.
These statistics highlight both the interdependence of the global economy and the absolute necessity that we act cooperatively as we move to address the emerging financial and economic challenges of the future.
There is no alternative.
Uncoordinated national responses are no longer adequate.
Everything literally is now connected to everything else  -  as graphically reflected in the rapid and synchronised nature of the current global economic downturn arising from the sub-prime crisis in the United States in 2007.
The world still faces at least seven complex economic challenges associated with the recovery. 
First, while confidence has improved, downside risks remain and recent indications suggest that more bad news is still to come.
Recent unemployment data indicate that jobs are being lost faster than expected. 
In the last week, both the European and US unemployment rates have reached 9.5 per cent, with leaders in both regions indicating that they expect unemployment to rise even further. 
These facts make clear that, as the financial sector crisis thaws, the trajectory of the real economy is still uncertain. 
That is why, for example, Bob Zoellick, President of the World Bank, warned only yesterday that the uncertainty of the current global recovery 
meant that we should be cautious about any premature withdrawal of current fiscal effort.
Second, credit markets continue to be impaired in many countries. 
The IMF has again revised up its estimate of total write-downs on financial assets to $4 trillion across the advanced economies  -  a staggering amount equal to about six per cent of global GDP. 
Several countries have not acted as decisively as others to address the toxic assets on the balance sheets of their major banks  -  creating continued uncertainty in global credit markets. 
Overall credit to the private sector in advanced economies is still forecast by the IMF to decline during both 2009 and 2010. 
Third, we face the challenges of lifting long-term growth. 
After the recession has passed, the global economy may continue to experience below trend economic growth for some time as the world adjusts to lower leverage and lower consumption in many of the major economies. 
We are already seeing more conservative borrowing and lending practices, which will constrain consumption and investment for some time. 
In the United States, business investment has now fallen by more than 16 per cent over the last year  -  this is the largest fall since quarterly records began (in the 1950's).
Fourth, we face the overarching challenge to address global imbalances. 
Rebalancing savings and investment in key countries  -  particularly in Asia  -  to maximise sustainable global economic growth will be a key challenge. 
This involves complex and sensitive policy matters, primarily focused on structural change and greater exchange rate flexibility in various major economies. 
However unless we address these challenges as part of a collective global growth renewal strategy, we will remain vulnerable to further shocks. 
Fifth, several major countries face significant fiscal challenges. 
Rising fiscal deficits in the United States are beginning to increase the yields of long-term government bonds. 
And there are concerns that this will lead to higher inflation in the future.
Medium term fiscal exit strategies to return budgets to balance will be critical for a long-term recovery.
Sixth, many economies will face the broader challenge of gradually exiting from the extraordinary policies they have put in place. 
The last 12 months have seen the implementation of extraordinary global policy measures including unprecedented fiscal, monetary and financial market interventions. 
As we move towards recovery, all governments will reach a point where these policies are neither sustainable nor desirable. 
But their withdrawal presents a series of risks to global recovery, including potentially negative impacts on demand, risks to price stability, and continued threats to the recovery of global financial markets.
The withdrawal of these interventions must be timely and maximally coordinated to avoid unnecessary economic and financial market dislocations.
Seventh, developing countries entered this crisis later than many advanced economies, but the consequences of the crisis for them will continue to be severe. 
Developing countries face a sharp reversal of capital flows and declining commodity export revenues. 
Emerging markets as a whole are expected to experience net capital outflows in 2009 of more than 1 per cent of their GDP and will likely face a refinancing funding gap of $1.8 trillion in 2009.
Again, this was the burden of Bob Zoellick's intervention yesterday.
These seven challenges represent potential roadblocks to recovery.
Unless we deal with these challenges as part of an effective coordinated strategy.
While collectively we may have responded effectively to the worst period of the immediate financial crisis, we will not be out of the woods until together we have built a credible path back to sustainable economic growth for the long term. 
As we turn from crisis to recovery, we must therefore consider the great global governance questions of our time.
Are our existing institutional structures adequate to deal with the challenges we face? 
Are our existing global policy and regulatory frameworks adequate to deal with these challenges?
Indeed, are our existing conceptual frameworks adequate to deal with the great challenges we face that now transcend much of the traditional ideological divide?
Taking the question of institutional structures first, the recent emergence of the G20 leaders' process from the existing G20 finance ministers' process has been a welcome development. 
The G20 is an emerging global institution that balances the twin but often competing demands of efficiency and legitimacy. 
The G20 is a broadly representative group  -  five European members; five from the Americas; five from Asia; and five from elsewhere (including Australia).
Its legitimacy is drawn from its representativeness.
It incorporates two-thirds of global population.
85 per cent of world GDP.
And it encompasses the world's major faith traditions, including the largest Muslim nation in the world Indonesia.
Yet the G20 has remained small enough to work nimbly, rapidly and effectively in the face of the current crisis.
The Group of 20  -  the G20  -  had its origin in the Asian Financial Crisis of 1997.
The Asian Financial Crisis showed how quickly financial contagion could spread.
It also demonstrated the importance of coordinated responses.
In the immediate aftermath of the Asian Financial crisis, G7 Finance Ministers met in Birmingham. 
They realised that action by the G7 was not enough  -  there were a range of systemically important countries outside the G7 whose collaboration was required  -  both developed and developing. 
In many respects, this was the genesis of the Group of 20.
Its formal inception was here in Germany two years after the Asian Financial Crisis.
In December 1999, with the German and Canadian Finance Ministers as hosts, the first G20 ministerial meeting was held right here in Berlin. 
In a perhaps prophetic statement, the inaugural chair of the G20 and then Canadian Finance Minister stated, "There is virtually no major aspect of the global economy or international financial system that will be outside of the group's purview".
So it is perhaps both symbolic  -  and significant  -  that almost exactly a decade later, and once again in Berlin, we are discussing the next phase in the G20's evolution.
Since 1999 the G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors have been meeting annually.
The G20 has promoted open and constructive discussion between industrial and emerging market economies on key policy questions related to global economic stability. 
Much of its work has been low-key but critically important to garnering the political support needed to progress major international economic policy initiatives.
The G20 was the circuit breaker in securing global agreement on limiting tax havens in 2005  -  breaking a deadlock in the OECD.
It provided momentum and technical solutions that were critical in the IMF's agreement on quota and voice reform in 2006 and 2007  -  where the G7 was unable to do so.
And in 2004, the G20 adopted its own Accord  -  a valuable guiding document for the G20's annual discussions of countries' planned policy reforms, as set out in the G20 Reform Agenda. 
The G20 therefore has a wealth of institutional expertise on the questions of financial crises and wider financial reform  -  an institutional expertise not easy to replicate elsewhere and, most critically, one which has been shaped by long institutional engagement between the major developed and emerging economies.
In the current crisis, it has shown its capacity to play a crucial role providing political will, policy coordination and institutional momentum to address the global challenges we face.
No institution is perfect.
And the G20 certainly is not.
But, to paraphrase Churchill, the G20 is the least imperfect of the various institutional alternatives on offer.
And we should build on it.
The G20 is an organisation that was born in crises. 
The Finance Ministers process was born out of the Asian Financial Crisis. 
And the G20 Leaders' process was born out of the current global financial crisis. 
In both settings, the G20 has shown that it can be a forum for action. 
But as the G20 turns its focus to the post crisis challenges, it is appropriate to consider what tools the G20 will need to turn itself from a ‘fire fighting' organisation into the kind of global institution that can address some of our longer term global economic challenges. 
Beyond institutional change, however, we also need to consider the conceptual framework within which we discuss and develop policy responses to the future global economic challenges we face.
The current crisis has fundamentally discredited the notion of self-regulating global financial markets.
What we have witnessed in the current crisis is a conspicuous example of market failure on a grand scale.
A failure of regulation.
A failure of transparency.
A corruption of incentives within private institutions.
But the crisis must not be allowed to result in over-correction and to strangle the natural dynamism of properly regulated free markets.
In fact, the crisis has underlined the importance of rejecting free market fundamentalism on the one hand and “over regulation” on the other, which can choke off the vitality of the market economy and erect barriers to global trade and investment. 
There is value in charting a global course between these extremes. 
To identify a set of common principles which can guide our coordinated global response to the crisis and frame our efforts to restore positive economic growth.
This is why Australia welcomes global consideration of Germany's proposal for a Charter for Sustainable Economic Activity. 
We welcome the charter's aim: to establish a framework to balance stability, growth and sustainability. 
And we welcome the inclusive multilateral approach that Germany proposes in developing this charter. 
The Charter aims to give the G20 a set of core values that can offer an overarching framework to address the range of future challenges that we are likely to face in the global economy.
If this Charter is to reach its potential, the voices of developing and non-G20 countries must be captured in these early stages.
It will need to be a living document open to all.
A non-binding framework that is responsive and adaptive to our developing understanding of what is needed to achieve sustainable growth.
In other words, a normative rather than statutory framework.
But with such a framework in place, collectively we are stronger to respond to the challenges that lie ahead.
Rather than constantly debating global economic policy from first principles, we would have an agreed conceptual framework that is anchored in the core principle of a properly and transparently regulated global market economy  -  one that maximises individual opportunity while minimising systemic risk.
Such a framework can help in:
Supporting macroeconomic stability and prevent crises from re-emerging, contain inflation, deliver sustainable economic and employment growth, and ameliorate inherently destabilising global financial imbalances between surplus and deficit economies.
Supporting sustainable public finance by providing a framework for returning budget deficits to balance across the economic cycle and to contain net debt within globally reasonable parameters.
Supporting properly regulated private financial markets which combine efficiency with transparency, strong oversight and global regulatory cooperation. 
Supporting social sustainability, valuing employment, opportunity and fairness  -  also helping to sustain the necessary political constituency support for the inevitable vicissitudes that arise from open markets.
Supporting environmental sustainability as the global economy adjusts to a more carbon-constrained reality.
Supporting open trade and investment regimes that eschew protectionism. 
Supporting developing countries and protect the poorest global citizens by providing greater access to global markets, better private capital flows and more effective development assistance. 
In all these areas, it is the sustainability of global economic recovery that is key.
And sustainability is demonstrably an integrated concept across a range of policy domains.
Germany has a proud history in leading global accords.
Australia remembers the instrumental role Germany played in bringing together the historic 2004 G20 Accord. 
We believe this new Charter concept can grow through careful nurturing both through the G20 process and beyond.
If achieved, such a Charter could reflect an historic convergence of developing, emerging and advanced economies' views about what sustainable economic activity really means and how we go about achieving this common aim through properly coordinated national policy actions.
Such a public declaration would also help focus the future work of the G20 at summit level.
The task now presented to Leaders in the lead up to Pittsburgh is to secure as widespread support as possible for such a Charter  -  to help guide global policy decisions as economies emerge from the immediate crisis in the period ahead.
In this respect, with both an over-arching policy charter and a revitalised, more representative institutional structure in the form of the G20, we will arguably be better placed to deal with the many practical challenges that lie ahead.
The world needs a political clearing house to deal nimbly, quickly and effectively with the challenges that arise and break the negotiating stalemates that otherwise occur in technical negotiating forums.
The G20, galvanised by a new global charter on sustainable economic growth, offers the best mechanism to achieve this.
This morning I met Chancellor Merkel.
We discussed how our respective economies were weathering the global economic storm.
In Australia we have taken strong, early decisive action in financial markets, in fiscal and monetary policy and in labour market programs to deal with rising unemployment.
Australia has so far weathered the global economic crisis better than most countries. 
According to the most recent OECD economic outlook:
Australia has the fastest growth in the OECD. 
Australia has a lower budget deficit than any of the major advanced economies. 
We have the lowest public net debt of any of the major advanced economies. 
We have the second lowest unemployment of any of the major advanced economies. 
And we are one of the few countries in the OECD to have so far avoided falling into a technical recession. 
The Government's early and decisive action to address the economy has helped to cushion Australia from the worst aspects of the global crisis. 
Australia has achieved this through coordinated policy action at home involving: 
First, stabilisation of domestic financial markets by providing guarantees for deposit holders and for banks' wholesale funding. (In fact, of the world's 11 remaining AA rated banks, four are Australian). 
Second, a rapid reduction in interest rates by the Reserve Bank of Australia in the last 9 months by a total of 425 basis points. 
Third, a three stage fiscal stimulus strategy involving 2 per cent of GDP in short term stimulus, just over 3 per cent of GDP in medium term stimulus and a further 1.2 per cent of GDP in long term nation building infrastructure. 
Fourth, a rapid expansion of labour market programs focussed on retrenched workers, young Australians and particular high unemployment regions in what we call a Jobs and Training Compact. 
The overall result of these measures is that:
Our economy grew in the March quarter at 0.4 per cent. 
Unemployment has risen to 5.7 per cent. 
Our budget deficit peaks at 4.9 per cent of GDP. 
And our net debt will peak at 13.8 per cent of GDP. 
However, 2009 remains a very stormy year ahead and none of our economies are out of the woods yet. 
Chancellor Merkel and I also discussed Germany's proposal for a global charter and the way Australia and Germany could work together and shape its future.
We also agreed that what we have been able to achieve in the G20 is a great example of how much both countries benefit when we work together.
This is for the simple reason that despite our different geographies, our different regions and our different histories, Australia and Germany have much in common.
We are both robust democracies and open economics.
We are both committed to making a real and positive difference to the global order.
We are both active participants in the institutions of our respective regions in Europe and Asia.
We both recognise that nations benefit more from cooperation than from a race to the bottom in politics and policies.
Last week Chancellor Merkel made a speech in Washington when she was honoured with an award for her contribution to trans-Atlantic relations.
In that speech, the Chancellor said that human dignity was the fundamental shared value on both sides of the Atlantic.
I'd like to think that even goes a bit further than that - the values Chancellor Merkel spoke of are very much shared in the Pacific as well.
And as Chancellor Merkel pointed out, this respect for human dignity influences our policy choices.
It influences the way we approach public policy at home.
It has a profound influence on our foreign policies abroad.
It shapes the way we craft economic policies  -  in particular in these times of crisis.
And it shapes how we approach critical long-term challenges like climate change.
It is fair to say that Australia and Germany don't always turn to each other first when we think in terms of international relations.
Germany, naturally, has a significant focus on Europe and its environs.
Australia has been more focused on the dynamic and rapidly changing Asia Pacific region.
But there is no reason that geography should constrain our engagement.
And today Chancellor Merkel and I made that clear with agreement to work together more closely on the great global challenges that confront us all  -  challenges that increasingly are no longer constrained by geography.
We agreed today to strengthen our security engagement in Afghanistan and on counter-terrorism.
We agreed to strengthen our cooperation on seeking a global solution to the pressing threat of climate change and to closer collaboration on renewable energy, including solar research.
And we agreed that working together more closely on development assistance will help us to build a better and fairer world.
These are all global challenges where, by strengthening our cooperation, we can both deliver better results for the world.
Tomorrow I go to Italy to join other leaders in the Major Economies Forum.
This forum will focus on trade, on climate change and on food security.
I look forward to working with Chancellor Merkel at those meetings.
It is another example of the shared interests Australia and Germany have.
And another example of how our two great nations can work together in new ways in a new and expanding global partnership for the future.


PM: I'm advised that this morning at around 7:45am Jakarta time, that's 10:45am Australian Eastern Standard Time, bombs exploded at the Marriott and the Ritz-Carlton Hotels in Jakarta.
Early this afternoon I convened a meeting of the National Security Committee of the Cabinet and of our various security agencies, to establish the facts concerning these events and what actions are being taken in response to them.
Let me state at the outset the following - any terrorist attack anywhere is an attack on us all. Any terrorist attack on our friends in Indonesia is an attack on our neighbours. Any terrorist attack is an act of cowardice, it is an act of murder, it is a barbaric act that violates the fundamental principles of human decency.
On behalf of the Australian Government, I extend our sympathy and condolences to the families and loved ones of those who've lost their lives in this terrorist attack, and our deep concern for those who have been injured. The Australian Government utterly condemns this terrorist attack, an attack that warrants condemnation from all governments around the world and our common resolve that we should work together to bring the perpetrators of this attack to justice.
Let me now go to the facts of this matter as best we know them in relation to the two hotel bombings, which have only occurred in Jakarta three or four hours ago. I'm advised that at 7:45am, a bomb was detonated at the Marriott Hotel in Jakarta, at the Mutiara Restaurant within that hotel, and that the restaurant was significantly damaged. I'm also advised that at around 7:49am, a bomb was detonated at the Ritz-Carlton Hotel, at the Airllanga Restaurant within that hotel, and that it too was significantly damaged.
I'm advised that as of 1:30pm this afternoon AEST, that there are some four to six dead and some 18 injured. Just prior to coming to speak to here, Australia's ambassador to Indonesia has told us that the Indonesian national police are now reporting that the number of dead has increased to nine, and around 40 injuries. These figures, of course, will be subject to revision. I'm also advised that as of now, there is one confirmed Australian who is injured, and we have a report of a second Australian injured.
The Department of Foreign Affairs has established a consular crisis centre, with a hotline of 1300 555 135  -  1300 555 135.
The hotline is to answer as best we can the questions of concerned members of the Australian public with family, friends and loved ones in Jakarta. It has been staffed as of 2pm this afternoon AEST and will have its staffing progressively enhanced as events unfold in response to need.
Let me go to the question of the numbers of registered Australians in Indonesia. Currently, there are some 1,053 Australians registered in Jakarta, and a total of some 4,745 Australians registered in Indonesia. As you would be aware, many Australians, both in Indonesia and in other countries abroad, choose not to register. Therefore, the total number of Australians registered in Jakarta and in Indonesia more broadly would be significantly higher than the figures that I have just read.
I have authorised, through the National Security Committee, all agencies of the Australian Government to offer all forms of assistance to the Government of Indonesia in their response to these attacks. The Deputy Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police has been in contact with his counterpart in the Indonesian national police, offering all forms of assistance in forensics, in victim identification, and also in counter-terrorism.
We have also offered all relevant assistance through our health authorities in attending to the needs of any burns victims.
I've spoken, as I indicated before, in the last half hour, to Australia's Ambassador to Indonesia, who advises me that Australian consular staff have been posted to all relevant hospitals in Jakarta to monitor the arrival of Australians or others for whom we have consular responsibility in Indonesia. I have also asked the Ambassador to convey to the Australian community in Jakarta the Government's willingness to provide all forms of practicable support as appropriate.
I've also asked the Ambassador to convey to the Indonesian Foreign Ministry and to the President the offers of Australian Government assistance in response to these attacks. I hope to speak to President Yudhoyono as soon as it is practicable for him to do so, given the many tasks for which he is responsible now on the ground in his country.
An emergency taskforce has been located within the Department of Foreign Affairs in Canberra, as has been the practice in previous terrorist attacks involving Australians abroad. This taskforce brings together all government agencies involved in counter-terrorism relevant to these attacks. That emergency taskforce is now at work.
As I've said repeatedly in recent times, terrorism remains a continuing threat to us all. I'm advised that the travel advisory circulated by the Department of Foreign Affairs as of early this week read as follows, and I quote from it:
“We advise you to reconsider your need to travel to Indonesia, including Bali, at this time due to the very high threat of terrorist attack. We continue to receive credible information that terrorists could be planning attacks in Indonesia. If you decide to travel to Indonesia, you should exercise extreme caution. Previous terrorist attacks against Westerners in Bali and Jakarta indicate these areas are priority targets. You should take particular care to avoid places known to be terrorist targets.”
The travel advisory goes on to say “the possible targets for terrorist attacks in Indonesia include international hotels.”
The travel advisory, as of this afternoon, has been updated to include information concerning these most recent attacks. Australians again are advised to reconsider their need for travel to Indonesia, including Bali.
These appalling attacks remind us afresh of the fact that terrorism remains a continuing threat to us all. The Government maintains absolute vigilance through its agencies at home and abroad on this threat. The Government will continue to respond to the advice of the National Security Advisor on any further resources and/or actions which may be necessary in the future.
I've been further advised of reports of other explosions in Jakarta this afternoon. We have been unable, as of now, to confirm the nature of these explosions, and we will advise you further on them as further details come to hand.
Let me conclude by saying that these attacks also bring back terrible memories to so many Australians whose lives were so tragically changed by earlier attacks in Bali, Indonesia and elsewhere around the world. Our thoughts are with these, our fellow Australians, at this time as well.
I'm happy to take your questions on this matter. 
JOURNALIST: Who do we suspect was responsible for this attack?
PM: The advice that I have from the National Security Committee and the agencies which service it is that this is a terrorist attack. In terms of the terrorist organisation and/or individuals responsible for it, that is currently the subject of work between the agencies. As of when that becomes clearer, then either myself or other ministers of the Government will make a further statement on that.
JOURNALIST: Would it be fair to say that JI is the top suspect?
PM: I can only respond to the advice of the expert agencies who have been analysing this matter. Plainly, terrorist organisations remain a threat to Australians around the world. Plainly, JI remains a threat as well, together with al-Qaeda. That is why over many, many months, and in the period that I've been in office, myself and other ministers have continued to reiterate the continuing threat of terrorism against all Australians.
JOURNALIST: You mentioned before that you had advice there were possible other threats imminent. Are you getting intelligence that this is part of a renewed campaign or a resurgent JI or other terrorist groups in the region?
PM: Is your question in relation to further bombs in Jakarta? On the question of the explosions in Jakarta, later and subsequent to the two bombings which I've referred to in some detail, I'll just reiterate that we are not in the position to confirm any further details about whether they are terrorist attacks or not. It is better that we simply proceed cautiously on that at this stage and in a measured way. As of when we have further information to hand as to whether these explosions are innocuous or not, we'll advise you further.
JOURNALIST: On the broader question of these suspected terrorist attacks this morning, are you getting intelligence that there is a bigger campaign perhaps underway?
PM: Our concern, consistent with the public statements made by the Government over a long period of time, is that the terrorist threat has been a continuing threat for some time. That remains valid as of now, as demonstrated graphically and horrifically by the events in Jakarta this morning, and therefore our vigilance must be maintained.
As I said in my remarks before, the Government will be responding to any further advice from the National Security Advisor about any further actions or resources in response to any further evolution of the threat against Australians at home or abroad.
JOURNALIST: Apart from JI, are you aware of any other organisations within Indonesia capable of an attack like this?
PM: I'd rather not go to the detail of the organisations concerned. I would rather wait for the considered advice of the intelligence community and of our security agencies on this. It is important to be measured in our response to this in terms of the information that we have at hand.
As I think you would all appreciate here, making sure that we make clear everything that can be made clear in the immediate aftermath of an attack which only occurred some four hours or so ago, is a difficult business. Our agencies are currently hard at work and hard at work with their Indonesian counterparts.
JOURNALIST: (inaudible) taken responsibility?
PM: To my current information, I am unaware of that. If that changes in any way then of course we will make a further statement concerning that.
JOURNALIST: Both of these hotels are popular with Western business people and in fact we understand that some embassy staff live at the hotels. So does it concern you that it seems to be an attack that's targeting Westerners again?
PM: Well again I would go to the content of our travel advisories and the importance that we attach to those warnings about targets and known targets for terrorists against Westerners in Jakarta and elsewhere.
If you go to the detail of the pre-existing travel advice, it does list a large and long number of potential locations.
You may be familiar with the long and rolling debate about the nature of our travel advisory which, I indicated before, calls upon people to reconsider travel to Indonesia. The fact that that advice has remained constant for such a long period of time reflects the seriousness with which we regard the continuing terrorist threat within Indonesia. 
It's been a matter, as you know, of some controversy and public debate and that is why I think our agencies have acted appropriately in providing that continuing advice to the government.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, did the intelligence agencies provide any specific warnings in relation to this attack? I appreciate there has been ongoing chatter but was there any specific warning about this particular attack?
PM: On the, as this has only just occurred I would rather not go to the matters concerning our most immediate intelligence. I would simply go back to what the travel advisories have said. I don't say that for any particular reason other than that it has only been a few hours and I would much rather thoroughly go through everything.
But I draw your attention to the fact again that the language contained within the travel advisory about threats against Australians, Westerners, in Jakarta and in international hotels is not there for idle purpose.
It is there because of what we have deduced over a period of time. And therefore, that is important to bear in mind when people read those travel advisories.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, only a number of days ago there was defence experts making some commentary about Indonesia's success in tackling JI and dismantling some of the cells in Indonesia and they were being lauded for doing so. Is this a wake-up call (inaudible)?
PM: I am unaware of the comments which you have just referred to.
But let me just say more broadly my own continuing view and why I have repeatedly made this point over a long period of time, and that is that the terrorist threat remains alive and well, across the world.
We have been reminded of this in most recent times in terms of actions for example in Mumbai. What we have learned over a period of time is that terrorism is an international phenomenon. It can strike anywhere at any time. And that is why all of our agencies nationally and internationally must be working in the closest possible coordination.
JOURNALIST: Has the Indonesian Government specifically asked for anything in particular from the Australian Government?
PM: I understand that a detailed conversation has occurred between the deputy commissioner of the Australian Federal Police and the Indonesian national police and his counterpart there. In terms of the content, the detailed content of that conversation, I am not apprised.
You will be aware of the fact that there is a long-standing and deep fabric of cooperation between the two police services on forensics, on victim identification and more broadly on counter terrorism, going right back to the appalling events in Bali.
That cooperation continues. We'll have greater clarity on what take-up the Indonesians wish to make of further offers of assistance as the day wears on and into tomorrow. But we on the Australian side are making all levels of physical preparation to make sure that any assets which our friends in Jakarta may want from us are there and are there quick smart.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, (inaudible) the facts of this matter - you have been briefed extensively by the various agencies this morning. You must be getting some preliminary indications about what has happened, and the circumstances surrounding it. Is the preliminary view that this is JI?
PM: I've just come from a long meeting which I convened and with all relevant agencies in attendance, as you would expect. And what we, what I have been advised demonstrably is this is a terrorist attack. You would understand that in the immediate hours following, we are concerned principally and primarily about the security and wellbeing of Australians and those for whom we have consular responsibility.
And as you would see from my remarks before about injured Australians and reports of injuries towards Australians, that has occupied the bulk of our attention, together with what needs to be put immediately in place in terms of identifying through forensics and other key elements of investigatory work who is responsible.
That investigatory work involving forensics is of critical importance, based on my own recollection for example, following the bombing of the Australian Embassy in Jakarta and certainly in the context of Bali. So it is important that we don't get ahead of ourselves. It is important that we establish the facts, and forensic work is critical.
As more comes to light on this we will not be backward in coming forward in providing you, the ladies and gentlemen of the press, and the wider Australian community with our conclusions on this.
But I think it is important to proceed cautiously.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, could you describe for us your immediate thoughts, your reaction to this (inaudible)? What was the first thing that went through your mind?
PM: I was telephoned this morning by my foreign policy adviser, I suppose about three quarters of an hour after this event occurred, and I was sick in the stomach. And I think all Australians would feel sick in the stomach.
This is an assault on all of us and we are dealing with some very ugly people. Very, very ugly people and dangerous.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, one final question on an unrelated matter -
PM: I said I would take questions on this and I would rather just leave it to that today.
Thank you very much.
(Ends)


I am delighted to be here today to address you at these prestigious annual awards.
These are the Academy Awards of the housing industry.
Congratulations to the Housing Industry Association, whose Australian Home of the Year Award is now in its 20th year.
The Australian Government strongly values the relationship it has built with the HIA.
We have worked together in developing and implementing the First Home Owners' Grant for new houses, the Housing Affordability Fund and First Home Saver Accounts.
Our close working relationship is due in no small part to the leadership and vision of Ron Silberberg.
I salute Ron, who is retiring in November, and thank him for his dedication and enthusiasm over the past 30 years with the HIA.
And the Government looks forward to working with Shane Goodwin when he moves up from Deputy Managing Director role in November.
Ron's efforts have helped build the HIA's respect and influence in government and in the wider business community.
Ron has done a great deal to keep alive the vision for mass home ownership communicated by Randal Dossetor when he founded the Association.
The Government shares that vision.
In my D. R. Dossetor lecture last year, I said our ambition is for Australia to be a home-owning society.
To extend the opportunity of home ownership to as many people as possible, and to provide high-quality, secure, safe homes for those who aren't yet in a position to own their own home.
The global economy is experiencing the worst global economic collapse in three quarters of a century.
It is important to note from the chart that the global outlook we currently face is significantly worse than in the previous two recessions in Australia:
     * During     the early 1990s recession, world growth fell to around 1.5 per cent in 1991.
     * During     the early 1980s recession, world growth fell to 0.9 per cent in 1982.
By contrast, the global economy is currently forecast to contract by 1.4 per cent in 2009.
This will be the first global contraction since IMF records began.
Growth rates in virtually every country have collapsed.
The average contraction in growth in the March quarter across the OECD economies was -2.1 per cent.
And falling growth has been particularly pronounced among Australia's trade partners.
Eight out of our top 10 trading partners are in recession.
And growth in the remaining two countries, India and China has fallen dramatically over the last year.
Across the developed world, only three of 33 advanced economies recorded positive growth in the March quarter.
Australia was one of those countries  -  growing at 0.4 per cent in the first quarter.
In the March quarter Australia was the fastest growing economy in the OECD group of developed countries.
And we are the only major advanced economy not to have fallen into recession at this point.
But Australia is not out of the woods just because we have so far avoided a technical recession.
But Australia has fared better than most  -  in part because we took early and decisive action.
The Government acted early and decisively to support the economy  -  to step in while the private sector was in retreat.
When the global financial crisis intensified in September last year, the Government recognised the severity of the crisis and formulated a comprehensive economic strategy to support the economy.
The government moved quickly to respond to the immediate crisis in the banking sector.
Our first priority was to ensure that the flow of credit to Australian businesses and mortgagees didn't evaporate as global financial markets collapsed.
Builders and business people all around Australia know better than most that credit is the lifeblood of the economy.
Without credit, businesses do not have the cash they need to support their operations and grow their business.
During the financial crisis the global financial system went into meltdown and interbank lending ground to a halt.
That is why the Government took a historic decision in October to guarantee term wholesale funding for APRA regulated banks, building societies, and credit unions.
The guarantee had an immediate effect.
By December  -  with the help of the guarantee - offshore markets had opened to Australian banks which raised more than $15.4 billion in guaranteed funds that month.
In January, banks raised more than $20 billion offshore.
With the guarantee, domestic banks could access much-needed funds to support lending in Australia.
In addition to help stabilise the financial system, the Government has also acted to support activity in the real economy.
Our plan was simple: nation building for recovery  -  supporting jobs, businesses and apprenticeships today by building the nation building infrastructure for tomorrow.
Our approach to stimulating the economy was to start with the components of aggregate demand and then identify policy levers that could be used to support activity in each area:
The key components of Gross Domestic Product are:
     * Consumption  -  about 54 per cent of GDP
     * Dwelling construction  -  about 6 per cent of GDP
     * Private Business Investment  -  17 per cent of GDP
     * Public Final Demand  -  22 per cent of GDP
In each of these key areas, we sought to identify measures to support the economy.
And we looked for measures that would support the economy right through the global recession  -  from immediate support, to the medium-term, right through to the long-term.
As the chart indicates, the $77 billion nation-building for recovery plan includes a wide range of measures phased from today through to the long term:
     * immediate stimulus of $27 billion, including cash payments, the trebling     of the first home owners' boost     and small business tax break for investment;
     * medium-term stimulus of $35 billion, including local community infrastructure,     the largest school modernisation in Australia's     history, social housing and shovel-ready infrastructure projects;
     * long-term     stimulus including major rail, road, port, education, clean-energy, and broadband.
Our first measures were designed to provide immediate short term support to the Australian economy as the global economy deteriorated rapidly.
Since infrastructure investment has long lead times, the Government decided to introduce fast-acting measures to directly stimulate consumer demand. 
To achieve this we invested $21 billion to provide immediate support to the economy  -  through cash payments to families, pensioners, veterans, and low income earners.
As the chart shows, those payments have boosted the Australian retail sector.
While in the major advanced economies, retail sales have fallen on average by 1.1 per cent since November, in Australia retail sales have grown 4.8 per cent during this time.
In the March quarter, the consumption component of GDP contributed positive 0.3 per cent to growth.
There is no doubt that without the economic stimulus, we would not have seen the positive numbers in last quarter's National Accounts.
Of course there are other factors at play, but without the stimulus measures we would clearly have fallen into a technical recession.
Second, we introduced another measure to stimulate the housing sector.
The Government introduced a $2 billion First Home Owners Boost to support the housing and construction industry.
The Government recognised that home building is critical to the Australian economy and must be supported.
Today I am pleased to announce that since its introduction, the First Home Owner's Boost has helped 118,150 first home buyers get into the market.
The month of June saw more than 20,000 grants delivered  -  this is the largest number since the Boost was introduced.
First Home Owners have come into the market like never before.
Loans to first home owners have doubled since the Boost was introduced.
This has been a significant boost to construction activity.
Housing finance commitments have increased substantially, particularly the number of loans for the construction of new houses, which has increased by 42.6 per cent since the FHOB was introduced in October 2008.
The recent trend in building approvals has also been upward, following the sharp falls in 2008.  Compared to the same time last year, before the onset of the global recession, building approvals are down by only 16 per cent in Australia.
That compares to falls of 38 per cent in Canada, 50 per cent in the US and 57 per cent in New Zealand.
In the March National Accounts, private dwelling construction contributed minus 0.3 to growth  -  a solid result for a cyclical industry in the context of a global recession that has seen construction grind to a halt in most advanced economies.
To support business investment we have taken decisive action to strengthen incentives for businesses to make capital investments, by introducing the 30 per cent Business Tax break for capital investment and a 50 per cent break for Small Business.  
This is a major new incentive for businesses that many HIA members will have already taken advantage of to increase their capital investment.  
As the chart indicates, Australian business investment through the year to March was positive at 1.1 per cent  -  and much stronger than business investment in our peer countries.  
In aggregate, the national accounts figures last week proved that these short term measures have worked to support the economy until our infrastructure investment comes online.  
As the chart indicates, without the short term economic cash stimulus payments, Australian growth would have been minus 0.2 per cent in the March quarter  -  pushing Australia into a technical recession and many businesses would not be keeping their heads above water through this global economic storm.   
Beyond the immediate term the government also acted early to support the economy in the medium term.
Again, a major component of our medium-term stimulus is housing  -  supporting jobs for sparkies, chippies and brickies.
We're investing $6.4 billion over the next three and a half years into the construction of 20,000 new social homes.
This is an unprecedented commitment to increasing the availability of affordable housing.
Our investment will also allow the repair of more than 45,000 dwellings, including around 10,000 dwellings that would have become uninhabitable without additional work.
In the past there has been a shortage of Defence personnel homes.
The Government's $252 million investment will be provided for the construction of more than 800 houses for our Defence personnel.
I can report that Defence Housing Australia is well ahead of schedule on its building program with contracts finalised for more than 502 of the planned houses.
18 of these defence are have already been completed.
We're sending HIA members into our schools as well.
Under the Building the Education Revolution Package, the Government is investing a total of $14.7 billion over three years to fund the building and rebuilding of primary and secondary school infrastructure as well as maintenance in Australia's schools.
The program will also provide funding to build around 537 new science laboratories and language centres in secondary schools.
Through our $4 billion Energy Efficient Homes package ceiling insulation will be installed in up to 2.9 million Australian homes.
And we are paying the installers directly.
It means tradespeople around the country are in work installing and manufacturing insulation while reducing household energy bills and carbon emissions.
The Insulation Council of Australia and New Zealand estimates that 4,000 jobs will be created directly from the insulation package.
The Housing Industry Association is a key partner in the delivery of many of the key elements of our medium term infrastructure projects  -  especially homes, schools, insulation, and community infrastructure. 
The Government is sponsoring HIA trade information nights that highlight the opportunities available under the Package.
All of these targeted support measures are vital, but it's just one facet of our economic recovery strategy that is making the difference for HIA members.
Over the longer term, the Government's strategy is nation-building for recovery.
We are supporting jobs today by investing in the nation-building infrastructure Australia needs for tomorrow.
     * We     are investing in major rail, road and port projects.
     * We'll     be investing in major clean energy projects, including what will become the     largest solar energy project anywhere in the world.
     * We     will also be investing up to $43 billion in a partnership with the private     sector to build a high-speed National Broadband Network to finally bring     Australia into the global digital economy of the 21st century.
In total $49 billion  -  or around 70 per cent  -  of our stimulus is directed to nation building infrastructure over the medium to longer term. 
By the end of the year we'll have more than 35,000 construction projects underway around the country.
This strategy of short-term, medium-term and long-term stimulus is providing a critical boost to confidence.
As the chart indicates, Australia's stimulus is phased over time to ensure it is timely, temporary and targeted.
This strategy of short, medium, and long term support for the economy during the global recession has helped to cushion Australia from the worst impacts of the global recession.
Overall the government's stimulus will have a significant impact on growth.
In 2009-10, Treasury estimates that growth will be increased by 2.75 per cent as a result of the stimulus.
And in 2010-11 growth will be increased by 1.5 per cent.
In aggregate, Treasury has estimated that without our nation building plan around 200,000 more Australians would be out of work in each of the next two years.
Without government action, unemployment would peak at over 10 per cent.
This month we saw an increase in unemployment to 5.8 per cent.
This data confirms the global recession is continuing to have a direct impact on the Australian economy and on Australian jobs.
No-one likes to see unemployment rise as a result of a global recession. 
But Australia's unemployment rate is lower than all the major advanced economies except Japan.
While there is a tough road ahead, Australia is weathering the storm better than most economies in the rest of the advanced world.
While the nation building and jobs plan will support hundreds of thousands of jobs that would have been otherwise lost to the global recession, we cannot stop jobs being lost.
That is why the government is acting to support those people who lose their jobs and young people who cannot find jobs as a result of the global crisis.
The Government is deploying 712,000 productivity training places to support those who have lost their jobs or cannot enter the labour market on the other hand.
The Government has done so with what it describes as a Jobs and Training Compact with Australia. A Compact with Young Australians so that anyone under the age of 25 must be earning or learning; a Compact with Retrenched Australians which provides training places for retrenched workers to gain new skills during the downtime in preparation for the recovery; and a Compact with Local Communities, driven in turn by a $650 million local jobs funds and priority employment coordinators in the twenty most acute unemployment regions in the country.
The aggregation of these measures is aimed at reducing job losses to an absolute minimum while at the same time doing everything possible to avoid the so-called ‘lost generation' of Australians who failed to re-enter the labour market after previous recessions by deploying a more comprehensive and aggressive training strategy for those affected by the current recession.
The global recession has of course had a significant impact on the budget's bottom line in Australia, as it has around the world.
The Australian budget has been hit with a $210 billon collapse in Australian tax revenues caused by the global recession.
This is the greatest collapse in tax revenues in our nation's history and has made a budget deficit necessary in Australia until the economy recovers.
But despite the revenue collapse and our stimulus measures, Australia's AAA credit rating has been reaffirmed since the budget.
And Australia's net debt is lower than any of any major advanced economies.
Government net debt as a share of GDP is expected to rise to 75 per cent in the Euro area, 83 per cent in the UK, 83 per cent in the US, and 136 per cent in Japan.
By contrast, Australia's net debt is projected to peak at 13.8 per cent of GDP in 2013-14, before it starts to fall again as our economy moves into a strong period of growth.
And Australia's deficit of 4.9 per cent of GDP is among the lowest in the advanced economies  -  lower than the average budget deficit of all the major advanced economies.
The Budget deficit in the US is 13.6 per cent of GDP, in Japan the deficit is 9.9 per cent of GDP, and in the UK the deficit is 9.8 per cent of GDP in 2009.
This rise in global public debt has been a necessary consequence of the responsible global response to the economic crisis.
The fiscal stimulus that has been put in place around the world  -  some $5 trillion or 8 per cent of global GDP  -  combined with monetary policy and financial sector interventions are an unprecedented global policy response.
While these policies have been necessary, they cannot be permanent and must be withdrawn when the time is right.
As I recently outlined in an address in Berlin, global coordination will be crucial to an orderly and successful exit from the fiscal and financial market interventions that governments have embraced.
There is therefore a strong rationale for the G20 to play a leading role. We must begin establishing a process to coordinate exit as the global recovery gains pace.
The second new challenge we face is to build the foundations of sustainable global growth and Australian growth for the future.
This challenge begins with the recognition that the source of our future growth cannot simply be the same as the source of our past growth.
We must build future growth from productivity gains rather than from a mining boom and an endless rise in consumer debt.
I am confident that Australians will pull together  -  workers, employers, unions, community organisations and governments to ensure that we pull through this crisis, and the tough recovery phase to emerge with a stronger more prosperous economy for the future.
(ends)



I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet and whose culture we celebrate as one of the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
And I acknowledge this great branch of the Australian Labor Party  -  the rank and file members and supporters who do some of the hardest jobs in politics.
Those who do the hard work of keeping our party strong and healthy.
Those who are instrumental to us staying in touch with our local communities.
Those who attend the meetings, hand out the flyers and who serve their communities on local councils and in local community organisations.
And those whose efforts help change the course of the history of this state and our nation.
Just as the efforts of an earlier generation of Tasmanians made history one hundred years ago, when the first Labor Government took office in October 1909 under Premier John Earle.   
Of course that government didn't last long.
In fact, only one week,  -  just like the first Labor government in the world, formed in Queensland ten years beforehand.
And just as happened in Queensland, that minority Labor government fell when the conservatives patched up their differences, frightened of the party of working people being in power.
That's the thing about the conservatives: always more united in their hostility to Labor than in any common policy purpose they might share together.
How little they have changed.   
It would be another five years until Labor could form a majority government in Tasmania.
Our party had modest beginnings, from the hard toil of working people.
But from little things, big things grow.
And in Tasmania, Labor has done big things.
Think back to last century, when (with one exception) for a half a century from 1934, Labor won every state election.
And now, in the early 21st century, David Bartlett is renewing the Labor vision for Tasmania  -  a vision built on investing in education, investing in infrastructure, and investing in the industries and jobs of the future.
Federally, Labor also now has the honour of representing every single Tasmanian seat in the House of Representatives.
And with that honour comes great responsibility.
And it's a responsibility that I take seriously.  
This Australian Labor Government  -  now just over 18 months old  -  consistent with Labor tradition, is committed to building a stronger Australia, a fairer Australia and an Australia ready for the challenges of the future.
This Government is facing the deepest global economic downturn in three quarters of a century.
It was a crisis born from the ideology and policies of the political right.
Neo-liberalism delivered us free market fundamentalism, unrestrained greed among finance executives, a boom in consumer and corporate debt, and a culture of weak regulation and a culture that said there was no place for government in the modern economy.
Neoliberal ideology and policy contributed to the creation of an unsustainable boom and bust global economy.
Around the world, governments of the responsible centre have been forced to step in to rescue the economy from global collapse.
As a Labor government we took the responsible course of action in response to the global crisis.
Early action.
Strong action.
Decisive action.
Action to make a difference.
And the bottom line is that we have made a difference.
We stepped in to the economy when the private sector was weak.
We acted to save the financial system from complete implosion: by providing sovereign guarantees to the banking system for the first time in the history of the Commonwealth.
We acted to cushion Australia from the worst aspects of the ensuring global recession by implementing a bold national strategy to support jobs, business and apprenticeships today by investing in the infrastructure we need tomorrow.
And we have acted to support those who through no fault of their own have lost their job or cannot find one by implementing a $1.5 billion Jobs and Training Compact with Australians, a compact with young Australians, a compact with retrenched Australians and a compact with local communities hardest hit.
In Tasmania, our strategy is no different.
2,808 Tasmanian first home buyers have taken advantage of the doubling of the First Home Owners Boost for existing homes and the trebling of the boost for newly constructed homes.  
This is leading to activity. 
In Tasmania, building approvals are up 7.1 per cent over the past year.
Already, under the National School Pride program, 273 projects have been approved for Tasmania, totalling $35.3 million and benefitting 80,695 students. Work begun on these schools last month.
Under Round 1 of the Primary Schools for the 21st Century program, Tasmania had 173 projects approved, totalling $228.3 million.
A total of thirty schools in Tasmania received funding for science and language centres.
Funding of $16.1 million for 65 social houses has already been approved for additional social housing in Tasmania.
A further $9.3 million has been approved for the repair of 516 social housing dwellings.
Additional Defence houses will be constructed in Tasmania at a cost of $2.8 million.
At the same time, the Australian Government has sought to use this stimulus strategy to invest in long-term, productivity-enhancing investments needed in skills and infrastructure for the future.
In Tasmania we are also investing in transport infrastructure projects  -  including the Kingston bypass, the Illawarra Road Link upgrade and the Brighton Bypasses.
And we are investing in the national broadband network  -  rolling out first across Tasmania.
Our total national stimulus in the state of Tasmania will total of around $1.4 billion.
70 per cent of which will be invested in the infrastructure we need for the future.
And we have done so on the basis of responsible, conservative economic management  -  expanding the role of government while the private economy is in retreat, while reducing that role as the private economy starts to recover.
Acting to intervene when it has been necessary.
Acting also to return the budget to surplus over time  -  and to maintain that budget discipline as we consider other important areas of national reform, including health.
And the result: as of today, Australia has the fastest growth, the second lowest unemployment and the lowest deficit and debt of all the Major Advanced Economies.
And as of today, the only one not to have gone into recession.
But when the rubber hits the road in all of this is jobs.
Because of the global recession, unemployment will continue to go up.
The action taken by the Government will support around 200,000 jobs that would otherwise be lost in each of the next two years.
This Labor Government has been a government of action  -  action to make a difference.
Today, you might have read an essay that I published in the national press that looks beyond the immediate response to the global recession towards the challenges of economic recovery.
I've noticed that some don't particularly appreciate it when I write long essays.
After the publication of my last essay in The Monthly 6 months ago, I'm informed that one national newspaper published more than fifty separate articles attacking it in one way or another.
I'm also informed that's about 60,000 words the newspaper in question devoted to my mediocre prose.
Nearly ten times the length of my original essay.
We should welcome a real debate about different ideas for the nation's future  -  including from newspapers that declare themselves unashamed defenders of the ideological right.
The Liberals weren't exactly big fans of the February essay either.
In large part because the Liberals don't like to admit the role of the neo-liberal ideology in bringing about the global financial crisis and the economic destruction this crisis has wrought.
Nor do the Liberals like to admit that it has been the interventionist policies of governments of the responsible centre around the world that have begun to arrest the decline in global growth.
In fact, in a stunning act of political hypocrisy, the Liberals instead seek to blame the centrist governments of the responsible centre for acting to clean up the global economic mess that is so much the product of their own ideological handiwork  -  unrestrained greed; unlimited credit and unregulated markets.
But the essay published today seeks to take the debate to a further stage.
It is more about the future than the past.
It is less about the crisis than it is about crafting the recovery.
It is about how we build a more sustainable economic growth strategy for Australia's future than we have seen in Australia's recent past.
It is about building a global competitiveness strategy for the future rather than just relying on the boom and bust of the mining sector, the real estate sector and the stock market that has so characterised so much of our past.
It is therefore about “the Building Decade” that lies ahead  -  building productivity growth, building a globally competitive Australia, putting in place each of the building blocks of this plan for the future.
As we pass through the worst part of the global recession, new challenges are emerging on the horizon.
The first of the new challenges relates to the transition period that lies ahead as we slowly move from crisis to recovery.
In the last 12 months of the crisis, governments around the world have implemented a range of extraordinary policies - fiscal, monetary and financial.
These policies including a massive injection of $5 trillion in fiscal stimulus; record low interest rates in many countries, and unprecedented bank guarantees and, in some countries, bail outs have been necessary to put a floor under a crisis.
But just as it was responsible to implement these policies during the crisis, it is also necessary to coordinate globally their gradual withdrawal once the recovery becomes clear.
That challenge  -  the challenge of creating a smooth and coordinated global exit strategy from the extraordinary policies that the economies of the world have had to put in place  -  is a challenge to which Australia and the world must direct their attention.
Coordinated exit will be one focus for discussion at the next meeting of the G20 in September when Australia once again plans to be actively engaged. 
The second of the emerging challenges facing Australia and the global economy is the challenge of building a sustainable growth model for the future. 
This challenge begins with the recognition that the source of Australia's future growth cannot simply be the same as for our past growth.
We cannot in the future rely exclusively on the windfall profits of a mining boom, a property boom, and a stock market boom  -  all fuelled by an exponential rise in private debt to drive sustainable economic growth for Australia's future.
Instead, we need to put in place a long-term economic reform strategy which will require patience and persistence to put in place  -  a strategy designed to lift Australia's declining productivity growth.
With the mining boom over and the prospect of a slower global recovery, Australia cannot rely alone on international fortune to carry us through the decade ahead. 
But just because the path to global economic recovery will be tough, does not mean that we must accept the inevitability of lower growth in Australia.
Instead, Australia must work smarter and harder to achieve better national growth in a weaker global economy  -  and without just depending primarily on the good fortune of an episodic mining boom.
As Opposition Leader, I often questioned where growth would come from when the mining boom was over.
The previous government ridiculed rather than ever responding to the question  -  the reason being that they had no substantive response at all.
Now, in Government, this Government has a responsibility to prepare for the long-term future.
In order to create sustainable growth for the decade ahead, we must lay the foundations today for a stronger and more productive economy for tomorrow.
In the long run, Australia's living standards are fundamentally determined by productivity growth.
Treasury data estimates that 80 per cent of the improvement in the living standards of Australians over our past 40 years has come from increased productivity.
The factors that make up productivity may not always be dramatic enough to make the front page of the newspaper.
But they are fundamentally important to Australia's future prosperity.
And as we have seen from the past, it is a continuing process of reform  -  and one where the results of reform often take upwards of a decade to become real drivers of our national economic performance.
Productivity, put simply, relates to how efficiently we produce goods and services.
In a single business, productivity is simply the amount of output the business produces for a given number of technologies and workers employed.
If that business manages to improve its production process such that it can produce more output with the same number of workers, then its productivity will increase.
And across the economy, productivity growth is simply an aggregation of all the productivity increases in all of our individual businesses.
In a single business, the productivity of its workers increases in three fundamental ways:
First, productivity increases when investment increases. With more technology, a single worker can produce more. That is why capital investment  -  both public and private - is critical to Australia's long term productivity performance.
Second, productivity increases when skills increase. When workers have more skills, they work more efficiently, and produce more output. That is why education, skills and training are an important driver of productivity.
Third, productivity increases when innovations are made. When research and development delivers a better production technique, a faster process or an innovative variation in the product or service being produced  -  then workers can produce more. That is why research, development and innovation are important for productivity.
The drivers of firm level productivity are fundamentally similar to the drivers of economy wide productivity. Investment, skills, innovation are key national drivers of our productivity, and hence of our long term living standards.
There is of course a fourth driver of productivity as well and that is the regulatory environment within which business operates. Where regulations are excessively complex or inconsistent across an economy, it impedes economic efficiency.  That is why regulatory reform and regulatory harmonisation to create a seamless Australian national economy is also a core driver of long-term productivity growth.
A fundamental economic challenge for Australia is the long-term decline in productivity that we have experienced over recent decades.
During the productivity cycle of the mid-1990s, we averaged productivity growth of 3.3 per cent each year.
During the productivity cycle from 1998-99 to 2003-04, productivity growth fell to 2.1 per cent.
And in the current cycle since 2003-04, productivity growth has fallen further to just 1.1 per cent.
This productivity growth was the product of the fundamental microeconomic reforms implemented during the Hawke-Keating governments  -  tariff reform, competition reform, labour market reform in particular.
But over the last decade, the reform process ground to a halt.
As we look beyond the global recession our focus for the future must be on the revitalisation of the productivity agenda.
In my first major economic address as Federal Labor Leader, given to the BCA in February 2007, I set out my concerns about the long-term decline in productivity growth under the previous government.
As I said then, I believe we need a third wave of micro-economic reform to bolster Australia's flagging productivity growth, following those of the 1980s and then the 1990s.
As I said then, resources booms do not last forever.
And as I said then, it was just plain wrong that during the resources boom, that only 8 per cent of the revenue proceeds of the revenue windfall that came from the boom was being invested in education and innovation.
And just 6 per cent on infrastructure.
Both these statistics coming from Saul Eslake's analysis at the time.
These are critical investments for the nation's long-term productivity growth.
And in many respects, the last decade represents a lost decade for the long term future.
That is why the decade ahead must become a “Building Decade”.
Since coming to office 18 months ago, the Australian Government has adopted a new set of priorities, focused on building the nation's long-term productivity growth.
Turning around the productivity collapse of recent years is at the heart of our economic strategy.
We cannot build a strong, prosperous and competitive economy without turning around that productivity collapse.
That's why from day one we made productivity reforms the priority in our dealings with State governments.
That's why the Government has launched an education revolution  -  in early childhood education; in deep reforms in the new National Education Agreement with the states and schools; in the biggest school modernisation program in Australia's history; in the implementation of the Bradley Review of higher education; the Cutler Review on Innovation, together with a radical expansion in capital expenditure in our TAFEs, universities and research institutions.
That's also why the Government set up the Building Australia Fund.  That is why we have invested some $35 billion in nation-building infrastructure projects in critical road, rail, port infrastructure, incorporating advice from Infrastructure Australia.
That is also why the Government is harmonising regulatory arrangements with the states and territories, including nationally uniform occupational health and safety laws.  This will reduce costs for business, thereby encouraging enterprise.
As the OECD noted the March 2009 report Going for Growth, investment in energy, water, transport and telecommunications networks can boost long-term economic output and productivity to a greater extent that other types of physical investment.
That's why 70 per cent of our national stimulus strategy is dedicated to investing in our national infrastructure.
The centrepiece of the Government's infrastructure investment for the future will be our National Broadband Network.
A critical driver of Australia's future economic prosperity will be broadband infrastructure and the services it delivers. 
Superfast broadband is likely to be one of the single biggest drivers of productivity growth in the decade ahead.
Just as railway tracks laid the future for the 19th century, and electricity grids and highways laid the future for the 20th century, so too broadband will become the core infrastructure of the 21st century.
Put simply, high-speed broadband contracts the time, space and cost of day to day business transactions  -  both for the private sector and the public sector.
That is why we are committed to, in partnership with the private sector, the construction of a $43 billion National Broadband Network.
Optical fibre to the home and business will deliver superfast speeds of 100 megabits per second  -  50 times faster than what most people use now.
Next generation wireless and satellite technologies will aim to provide every household with fast broadband.
Like the building of the Snowy River scheme, the Sydney Harbour Bridge, Tasmania's great hydroelectric schemes, and the national highway network  -  this is an historic act of nation building.
At the moment, Australia's broadband infrastructure is not up to scratch.
Slow broadband is holding our nation back.
Out of 30 leading economies, our broadband speeds are behind all but three countries.
We are in the bottom half of OECD countries for broadband take-up (16 out of 30 in 2008).
Years of failed policy have left Australia as a ‘broadband backwater'.
The former Government failed to deliver fast broadband for Australia.
In 12 years they had 18 failed plans.
They never understood the importance of high-speed broadband to our long-term future.
They failed to build for our nation's prosperity beyond the mining boom.
You would think with $334 billion of extra tax revenue delivered to the Commonwealth budget off the back of the mining boom, that the previous government could have found their way to invest in at least one major national infrastructure project.
But no.
And Australia has suffered in the productivity stakes as a result. 
Our Government is committed to superfast broadband because it has the potential to transform our economy.
Building a national high speed broadband network will create jobs.
     * 25,000 jobs every year, on average, over the life of the project.
     * At its peak, it will support 37,000 jobs.
High speed broadband will generate additional economic activity.
The National Broadband Network is expected to generate additional economic activity worth some $37 billion over the life of the project (an additional quarter per cent of GDP every year for the life of the project).
Critically, high speed broadband, once built, will also spur innovation and productivity in the long term.
It was estimated by the former Federal Department of Communications that innovation from information and communications technology is the single biggest driver of business productivity -  it drives 78 per cent of productivity gains in service businesses and 85 per cent in manufacturing businesses.
How does broadband increase productivity for businesses?
Broadband   allows the rapid transfer of information and saves business time and money. 
     * Online marketing and sales mean bigger markets without the traditional costs of  expansion.
     * Online  communication with suppliers, employees and customers saves time.
     * Online inventory management and other internal business functions save time, reduce paperwork and save money.
And it creates new opportunities for new businesses developing new broadband applications.
High speed broadband will help our regional towns grow and stay connected.
High   speed broadband will plug our nation into the global economy and help us overcome   the tyranny of distance. 
High speed broadband can help us act on climate   change.
     * A 2007 study found that broadband could help reduce Australia's annual emissions of greenhouse gases by 5 per cent.
     * Video conferencing can remove the need to travel for face - to - face  meetings. The Australian division of Cisco claims that it achieved a 16 per cent reduction in air travel in a single year after it adopted videoconferencing and other telepresence facilities.
High speed broadband will revolutionise teaching  -  bringing the knowledge and experiences of the world into every classroom.
High speed broadband will revolutionise health care in our medical centres and hospitals.
     * Access to specialist advice through the secure electronic transfer of diagnostic information and test results, such as x-rays, could enable early diagnosis and potentially reduce hospital stay times.
Across all key services  -  energy, water, health and transport  -  it is estimated by Access Economics in a 2009 report that the adoption of smart technologies and the roll - out of high - speed broadband could result in more than 70 000 jobs being added to the Australian economy and add 1.5 per cent to the level of Australia's Gross Domestic Product within a few years.
With so many economic and social benefits to flow from superfast broadband it is absolutely critical that we get on with the job  -  and that is what we intend to do.
Just this morning I was pleased to announce the appointment of Mr Mike Quigley as the Executive Chair and CEO of the National Broadband Network Company we have established to roll out the network.
Mike is an Australian who has had a distinguished career in the telecommunications industry, and was most recently President and Chief Operating Officer of Alcatel.
Mike has a big job ahead of him and we wish him well. 
And where will we start the roll-out of the National Broadband Network?
Right here in Tasmania.
Why Tasmania?
Because Tasmania has for too long been neglected and is behind the rest of the country for Broadband.
This state has the lowest proportion of households with broadband of any state or territory (39% compared with the Australian average of 52%).
Just this morning I announced the next critical steps in the Tasmanian roll-out.
I opened the Aurora Energy and National Broadband Network Data Centre here in Hobart.
The Data Centre will house the critical operating and business support systems that will operate the National Broadband Network in Tasmania.
Today, I laid the first piece of optical fibre in our National Broadband Network  -  the first step towards pulling Australia out of broadband dark ages and into the digital economy of the future.
It is the first physical demonstration of work commencing on the ground, here in Tasmania.
Second, I announced the appointment of Doug Campbell as the Chair of the Tasmanian National Broadband Network company.
This company has been established to fast-track the rollout the NBN in this state.
Doug is an Australian who has a wealth of telecommunications experience, both in Australia and internationally, including being the primary force behind the creation of very successful Telstra Country Wide.
Third, I announced the first locations for the roll-out of optical fibre.
We will start in the towns of Smithton, Scottsdale and Midway Point.
Nearly 5000 homes and business in these towns will see fibre to the home and business rolled-out.
To support the roll-out to these towns and get ready for the next towns, we will build backbone fibre optic cable in five locations.
Broadband will accelerate development and support jobs in these regions and right across Tasmania.
That is why we are getting on the job.
We are not in government for the sake of being there.
That's what the Liberals do.
We're in government to make a difference.
To build a stronger Australia, a fairer Australia and an Australia prepared for the challenges of the future.
To build the jobs of the future.
To deliver for working families for the future.
To support those who are doing it tough now and in the future.
To build a stronger Australia for the future  -  while never allowing the fair-go to slide out the back door.
And to achieve this purpose, this government will move ahead with this major program of national reform.
This will be the Building Decade.
It will require consistency of purpose.
It will require persistence, patience and perseverance.
And it will require resolute political will.
But when the history is written, let us hope they will look back and say this was a Government that made a difference.


Before the election, I made this commitment: that we would end the blame game which had gone on for too long, and that with the reform of our nation's health and hospital system, that the buck would stop with me.
I said we were determined to improve health and hospitals right across the nation, not just in a few marginal seats here and there.
I made the commitment that if elected to Government, the Commonwealth would take responsibility for major reforms of Australia's health and hospitals system. And I said that if the States and Territories were not willing to implement cooperatively, a comprehensive health and hospitals reform plan to end the blame game, the Commonwealth would take the matter to the Australian people for a mandate to take full funding responsibility for the system.
The Government stands by each of these commitments. The Government takes its election commitments on health reform seriously, as we have done in each of the other major policy reforms we have embraced.
Today, I will outline our broader approach to the recommendations contained in this health and hospitals reform report.
This, by any definition, is a major report with major implications for the nation, and I warn you in advance that my remarks today will be substantial in length, 40 minutes or more in duration  -  settle down, buckle up.
But I believe that it's necessary given that this one of the most complex areas of policy reform to be undertaken by Government.
Since coming to office just over 18 months ago, the Government has demonstrated a serious commitment to health care and health reform.
As you can see from the slide, we have made significant additional recurrent investments in the system  -  on top of the one-off injection of half a billion dollars into the system in 2008-09 to deal with the immediate crisis in hospital funding we confronted on coming to office.
Last November, we delivered a record $64 billion National Healthcare Agreement which meant:
$60 billion for health and public hospital services over the next five years.
A $1.1 billion investment in training more doctors, nurses and allied health workers  -  the single largest investment in the health system's biggest capacity constraint.
A $750 million investment in taking pressure off emergency departments - with an agreed performance benchmark that 80 per cent of emergency department presentations would be seen within clinically recommended triage times by 2012-13, as recommended by the Australian College of Emergency Medicine.
A further $500 million investment in sub-acute care beds.
A further $448 million investment in prevention, expanding the preventive health investment to $872 million  -  the single largest investment by an Australian Government in prevention, ever.
And this comes on top of the immediate $600 million investment we made on coming to office in slashing elective surgery waiting times  -  just in its first stage, delivering 41,000 extra elective procedures, well above our target of 25,000.
In addition to the measures contained in the National Health Care Agreement, we are also investing more than a quarter of a billion dollars in primary health care services in local communities - with 32 new GP Super Clinics, and increased GP training places.
Alongside these funding increases, we have developed robust accountability measures through the COAG Reform Council to measure clearly real improvements in areas like hospital waiting times; screening for breast, cervical and bowel cancer; and vaccination rates.
These investments are already being implemented because we regarded them as urgent, and because they are not contingent on the larger blueprint for health care reform I am discussing today.
We are also now undertaking historic investments in nation building health infrastructure.
We are investing $3.2 billion allocated to 36 major projects across our hospitals and medical research institutes.
And we have committed the single largest investment in cancer care infrastructure in Australia  -  with a $1.2 billion funding investment for two world-class comprehensive cancer centres at Parkville in Melbourne and the Chris O'Brien Cancer Centre at Royal Prince Alfred Hospital in Sydney, and a new national network of centres integrating cancer research, education and care.
All up, the Government has delivered substantive progress in health care reform, as reflected in the contents of this slide.
And these reforms have reflected our priorities.
A commitment to prevention, because prevention is better than cure.
A commitment to primary care, because our GPs represent the front line of care.
A commitment to invest in the critical problem areas of our hospitals  -  to reduce waiting times for elective surgery and to improve access for our emergency departments.
A commitment to sub-acute care to reduce preventable admissions to hospitals.
A commitment to investing in our health workforce and health infrastructure needs.
And a commitment to improve accountability for the health system overall, reflected in the new measurement systems incorporated for the first time in COAG reforms. 
But the time has now come to move to the next stage of comprehensive health and hospital reform for the nation.
Early last year we established the National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission, the first comprehensive review of the nation's health system in nearly two decades.
Ten leading health experts were appointed to the Commission, bringing together a wealth of experience from past roles as clinicians, hospital and health system administrators, medical researchers; through roles in the community sector, remote area nursing, and in the most senior levels of government including a former Liberal Health Minister, Rob Knowles and a former Labor Premier Geoff Gallop.
The Commission is chaired by Dr Christine Bennett, who is former Chief Executive of Westmead Hospital and Community Health Services, Chief Medical Officer of BUP Australia, and CEO of Research Australia.
They were charged with the job of developing a long-term plan for health reform.
The Commission's initial task was to advise on the framework for the next Australian Health Care agreements, which were concluded last year.
It provided valuable advice, assisting with the development of new performance benchmarks designed to ensure substantial returns on the new investments that we were making in the health care system.
It is for this reason that the bulk of the Government's investments in the health and hospital system so far have in fact been targeted in the areas that the Commission has identified in the report released today as priorities for the long term.
Of course, the Commission's larger task was to report on a long-term health reform plan to provide sustainable improvements in the performance of the health system for the future.
The Commission undertook a substantial and extensive consultation process - receiving more than 800 submissions from governments, professional associations, think tanks, health experts and patients and consumers that rely on our health system.
It also held more than 100 consultations among health experts, health consumers and people in every part of the health system.
It also went out of its way to hear the voice of people in regional Australia  -  locations like Dubbo, Alice Springs and Cairns.
In February, the Commission provided the Government with an interim report.
That interim report focused on proposals with four key themes for reform:
     * taking responsibility
     * connecting care
     * facing inequities in the system and
     * and driving quality performance 
On June 30 the Government received the final report of the Commission, and after having the opportunity to assess that report over the last couple of weeks, we are releasing it today.
I would publicly thank Christine Bennett and the other Commissioners for their extraordinary dedication to this complex task.
In releasing the Commission's report today, I am also setting out the next steps forward for national health care reform.
As we embark on the reform of our health and hospital system, we are identifying seven guiding principles for reform:
One - Building a health system that is focused on people, not on systems  -  and which delivers genuinely ‘joined-up' services that are easier for an individual patient to navigate, rather than facing the frustration of not knowing where to go because finding your way through the system is just too hard.
Two - maximising our focus on prevention, because prevention is better than cure.
Three - delivering comprehensive primary care or frontline care that properly connects GPs and community care on the one hand and acute and sub-acute care on the other.
Four - most critically, minimising waiting times for acute care  -  for both our public hospital emergency departments and for planned elective surgery  -  and increasing the availability of hospital beds.
Five - improving the care provided after hospital  -  by doing a better job in delivering sub-acute care and community based care.
Six - providing better access to care, improving the quality and safety of our health care system and achieving better health care outcomes for all Australians.  
Finally, doing all this more efficiently with a clear-cut delineation of the roles and responsibilities of the Commonwealth and the States - cost-effectively for the health system and at minimum cost to individual patients.
The Health Reform Commission has provided critical reasons as to why system-wide health care reform is necessary now.
As a starting point, however, it is important to recognise the strengths of our health system.
In many respects, our health system compares well to other nations.
As you can see from the slide, by international benchmarks, we have one of the highest life expectancies in the world.
And we achieve relatively good health outcomes with an expenditure that is below the OECD average, at 8.7 per cent of GDP in 2006-07.
But things are changing.
Demographic changes such as population ageing will see the health cost curve rise in the years to come  -  with 1.6 million Australians aged over 85 by 2047, four times as many as there are today.
As the slide shows, these changing demographics will increase demand for health services  -  contributing 23 per cent of the total increase in health outlays by 2033.
Our unhealthy lifestyles are also catching up with us, with escalating rates of chronic disease.
Combined, these factors will result in rising costs to the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme, alongside the higher cost of medical technologies and skilled workers.
As indicated in the slide, if we continue to provide health services on the basis of business-as-usual, with no policy change, our health and aged care costs are forecast to rise sharply from around nine per cent of GDP, now, to 12.4 per cent of GDP a little over two decades from now.
By any standard this is a very large increase indeed. It goes from $96.5 billion in ‘07-08 to $246 billion in 2032-33.
These changes are also putting greater pressure on the universality of health care, the cornerstone of the Australian health system since Medicare.
Indeed already, we see faults and strains on the system that the Commission concludes are leading to the emergence of a two-tiered health system, with the best quality care becoming available only to those who can afford it  -  or those who are located in the right places.
As you can see from the slide, the more remote you go and as access to services dwindle, the lower the Medicare benefits returned per patient.
Meanwhile, the impact of the growing pressures on our health system are falling disproportionately on the most disadvantaged Australians  -  those with the least capacity to bear those strains.
Another reason for change is that we need a health system built around the needs of patients, not providers.
The health system of the past was built on a model of care where most treatment was provided within the walls of a hospital.
But times have changed, models of care have changed, and the needs of patients have changed as well. It's time we had a health system that caught up with these changes.
A health system that places the needs of the patient first and that helps the patient navigate what can be a completely confusing system for them.
But there are a few better pieces of evidence of that need for change than the fact that today we spend just two per cent of our health funding on prevention, and 70 per cent on providing acute care.  The pie chart on your screen shows this clearly.
In other words, our health system only starts caring about people's health when they get sick instead of investing to keep them fit and well as long as possible.
In principle we all know that prevention is better than cure - but there's a lot to be done to make that a guiding principle of our health system and the funding of that system.
Focusing on preventative health means re-thinking many aspects of our health system.
Furthermore, one of the most important is to build a strong, robust and efficient primary health care system -  that is, providing better access to front line care through our GPs and related community care services.
On this point, Australia is beginning to fall behind.
Our GPs in particular are under increasing pressure to provide services that are more appropriately provided by other health professionals, with the result that many patients either fall through the cracks or are forced into the hospital system.
As you can see from the graph, in recent years there has been a shift towards larger practices, but large practices still represent only about half of all practices.
An even smaller proportion of these larger practices provide genuine multidisciplinary care.
Another critical sector where there are significant inefficiencies are our public hospitals, arising from a patchwork of inconsistent and sometimes conflicting financial, clinical and jurisdictional responsibilities.
As the slide shows, one out of every three Australians who present to public hospital emergency departments are not seen within a clinically recommended time  -  and this has not changed for quite some time.
And as the next slide shows, one out of every six Australians on a waiting list for elective surgery are not seen within a clinically recommended time.
The Commission's Report estimates a productivity gap between current and optimal efficiency of our hospitals of somewhere in the order of 20 to 25 per cent  -  a potentially massive source of improved service delivery.
The Commission also notes that aged care services will need to respond to population ageing by at least doubling the number of aged care places from 223,000 places to 464,000 places by 2030.
Provisions will also need to be made for greater flexibility in the provision of aged care services.
And the Commission notes there is scope for greater efficiency in the provision of aged care as well, concluding that aged care providers could be 17 per cent more efficient if all operated at the level of the most efficient services, creating the capacity for an additional 23,100 clients in the aged care sector.
Dental health is identified as one of the major access and equity gaps plaguing our current health care system.
The Commission cites research from earlier this decade estimating that there were some 650,000 Australians on our public dental waiting lists  -  among them our pensioners and lowest income earners  -  with an average wait of two years for essential dental treatment.
As the slide indicates, these public patients experience significantly poorer oral health outcomes than the general population.
We also face a serious problem of rising mental illness in our community. Some 65 per cent of people who need mental health care go untreated. And as the slide shows, this starts with young Australians.
A lack of early identification services and intervention, forces people suffering from acute mental illness to turn to hospital-based services as their first and only option for help.
Further (inaudible) we have a major problem with adequacy of the health workforce  -  particularly in rural and remote Australia.
This is a problem today, but it will become a greater problem in the future, with the vast increase in the demand for health workers.
Finally, the Commission concludes better data is equally vital for monitoring the effectiveness of reforms to be undertaken so we can measure the outcomes of the changes to the inputs we may make.
These, then, are some of the major reasons canvassed by the Health Reform Commission to underpin what they describe as a system that has now reached a tipping point  -  where fundamental reforms are now needed, rather than just tinkering at the edges.
The Commission has outlined an extensive and graduated reform plan to address these major emerging challenges for the system.
Having reflected on the advice in the report, the Government faces three strategic options for the future.
Our first option is a partial takeover of the health system, with the Commonwealth taking responsibility for the following:
All preventative care; all primary care; all hospital outpatients; all dental care; all aged care; all non-acute mental health services; 40 per cent of the funding for all acute hospital patients, and  all sub-acute care delivered outside of our hospitals.
In itself, this would deliver the single most comprehensive health and hospital reforms since the introduction of Medicare.
Let me now go to some of the content of these individual recommended reforms.
First, the Commission recommends that we need to make preventiona focus of our health system.
This means national leadership through an independent National Health Promotion Agency and governments together committing to long-term targets for health outcomes.
Second, to deliver better connected care, the Commission recommends a series of reforms across the health system. 
Primary care services should be established as the cornerstone of a future person-centred health system, with the Commonwealth undertaking full funding responsibility.
This should be supplemented by investment in local health infrastructure, so Australians have access to ‘one-stop-shop' community health services and a broad range of services with extended opening hours at more convenient times for patients, as was reflected in one of the presentations from an Australian citizen about his concerns about what he needs from the health system today.
Third, the Commission recommends our hospitals of the future should deliver highly specialised, technical care  -  with improved access to care for patients and new funding arrangements to make that access possible, including:
New National Access Targets that are used to measure and report on whether people are accessing the services they need and when.
Second, a new way of funding hospitals with the Australian Government paying States and Territories a set amount for each episode of care and treatment that public hospitals provide, otherwise called activity based funding.
Third, improving accountability in our hospitals, with public and private hospitals required to report publicly on performance against a national set of indicators which measure access, efficiency and quality of care provided.
Fourth, reshaping our hospitals to separate elective and emergency services, to help prevent planned surgery and procedures being cancelled when emergency patients take priority in future planning.
Five, reforms to public hospital outpatient services to more closely meet patients needs, including providing more of these services in community settings.
Six, strengthening subacute care as a priority for health infrastructure investments  to help provide more help for people to recover and restore their health following acute intervention.
Furthermore, the Commission's proposals for aged care reform are significant. They include more choice for consumers by lifting the current restrictions on the number of aged care places on offer, and providing greater scope for people to choose for themselves between community or residential care.
Also, making the system work better by funding people, not places, supplemented by streamlined, consistent assessment and aged care staff that are trained to support consumers to complete advance care plans.
And, the use of better technology to improve the safety, efficiency and effectiveness of aged care.
In addition to making our health system work together more effectively, the Commission says we also need to target the major gaps in our system to deliver better access for patients across all categories of health need.
The Commission recommends a new National Aboriginal Health and Torres Strait Islander Health Authority to hold all health services to account for providing the appropriate services for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples.
It also recommends mental health services should be best supported in the community with an increased investment in early intervention and social support services, stable housing and access to speciality mental health and dementia care services.
The area that represents one of the greatest challenges to achieve better health access is of course, dental health.
Dental health is among the starkest markers of inequality for Australians today. For dental care, the Commission has recommended:
‘Denticare Australia', a bold proposal for universal access to dental care that would provide preventative, diagnostic and restorative services including extractions and dentures. It is proposed that this would be funded by an estimated increase in the Medicare Levy of 0.75 per cent in addition to existing funding by governments.
Second, a nation-wide expansion of pre-school and school dental programs; and third, an expansion of the dental workforce through a one-year internship scheme prior to full registration  -  bringing dental practitioners into line with other medical practitioners.
The Commission also makes a range of recommendations to improve access to rural and regional health where current health outcomes are generally worse than for our major cities.
Fundamental to reform is to deliver clear-cut lines of accountability between Governments.  Australians are tired of waste and duplication and the blame game.
In its final report, the Commission calls for one health system with a national approach to improving quality, fairness and outcomes.
It proposes that the Commonwealth should take responsibility for preventative health through a new Health Promotion Agency.
The Commission also proposes the Commonwealth should take full responsibility for funding and policy of primary health care services.
The Commission recommends:
Outpatients services in our public hospitals being met by the Commonwealth at 100 per cent of the efficient cost per service, capped at that level.
It recommends acute care for patients admitted to a hospital, or attendances at public hospital emergency departments, being met by the Commonwealth at 40 per cent of the efficient cost per case, with States to pay the remaining 60 per cent.
It recommends expanding Commonwealth funding of sub-acute care.
It recommends the Commonwealth should drive a national approach to workforce planning, education and professional registration, through the new National Workforce Agency.
The Commission also argues that the Commonwealth should take leadership in delivering a patient-controlled electronic health record for all Australians to improve the clinical effectiveness and economic efficiency of overall health system.
The Commission estimates that this entire reform plan comes at an indicative cost  -  to both Commonwealth and State Governments - of between $2.8 billion and $5.7 billion in recurrent costs per year, net of the Denticare Australia proposal.
In addition, it recommends between $4.3 billion and $7.5 billion in one-off capital costs.
The Australian Institute of Health and Welfare has also estimated that these reforms would reduce spending by $4 billion per year two decades from now when measured against a no-policy change scenario.
As you can see this reform which we describe as the partial take over option  -  is in fact comprehensive in its scope.
The second strategic option that grows from the report is to do all of the above as a first stage of reform, followed by the Commonwealth moving to a second stage of reform in the full takeover of the funding for our hospitals system.
Finally, there is a third strategic option available to the Government - one which the Commission explicitly recommends against  -  and that is undertaking both the above options simultaneously.
This would give the Commonwealth full funding responsibility for all aspects of our health system.
The Government will leave each of these three options on the table for the next six months or so, as we engage in a detailed, direct consultation with the health sector and with communities around the nation on their response to the recommendations of the Health Commission Report.
We believe that the nation now needs to debate all three of these strategic options on the basis of now having a concrete set of proposals on the table.
Having outlined the three strategic options and their constituent parts that now lie before the Government, some will now ask why the Government will not announce a decision today on which strategy it will embrace for the future.
There are a number of reasons for this.
First, the implementation of any of these options has massive implications for all Australians.  The Government is determined to get this right through a thorough, methodical approach.
The health care sector consumes almost one in every 10 dollars in Australia and employs one in every 14 workers.  It is used every day by millions of Australians.
The Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme subsidises 171 million prescriptions every year.
Medicare funds more than 279 million medical services each year  -  in other words, 10 services for every Australian each year.  Public hospitals deliver over seven million accident and emergency services every year. 
There are also about five million actual hospital admissions and 41 million outpatient services. And in any one fortnight, almost one in four Australians visit a doctor in their community.
Therefore fundamental decisions about the entire system must not be taken lightly, and we do not intend to do so.
To this end, now that the Commission has provided its independent report, the Government will use the recommendations of this report as a basis for direct consultation with the health sector and the Australian public between now and the end of the year.
The Minister and I will now engage directly with the nation's major hospitals in each of our capital cities.
This will begin tomorrow when the Minister and I visit Royal North Shore Hospital in Sydney, the first of a series of consultations with around 25 major metropolitan teaching hospitals around the country.
The Minister and I believe that we need to hear first-hand from those in the front-line of health and hospital care  -  warts and all.  I'm sure a lot of what we hear won't be pretty.
And I'm sure we'll also hear many of the good things our health and hospital systems are doing as well.  We want to hear directly their response to the various recommendations contained in this report.
In addition, the Government will be consulting directly with a representative group of rural, regional and private hospitals as well our health professionals, community health services and other critical parties to the debate.
Following the conclusion of this extensive direct engagement with the sector based on the concrete recommendations put to the Government by the Commission, the Government will then convene a special COAG meeting with the States and Territories in late 2009, explicitly on health and hospitals reform. 
This will be followed by a further COAG meeting in early 2010 where the Commonwealth will put to the States and Territories a reform plan that they would either agree with or disagree with as a future direction for health and hospitals reform.
Consistent with the Government's pre-election commitments, if there is no agreement to a comprehensive national reform plan, the Commonwealth will proceed to seek a mandate from the Australian people for the proper reform of our health system for the future.
That is our plan, that is our intention, that is our course of action.
There is a second important set of reasons for using this process to reach final decisions on the future of the system.
Future reform of the health and hospital system will obviously have profound implications for the public revenue and the Government is not scheduled to release the Henry Report until years' end.
Also, the Government is due to receive the next Intergenerational Report by years' end as well, which will contain new demographic data for the future as we seek to plan the system for the future.
It therefore makes sense to be armed with these two reports as we move to final decisions on the future of the system.
Finally, given the serious stakes involved, it is important that all parties now engage in a fully informed debate shaped by the facts as contained in the Commission's report.
It is not rational to engage immediately in the politics of a simplistic rule-in or rule-out of any of the recommendations contained in the Commission's report.
Inevitably we, the Government, will not accept all of their recommendations.
Nonetheless, it is time that a considered, mature, national debate occur on the critical decisions we as a nation need to make for the future.
It is now nearly two decades since a review of this significance has been undertaken on health and hospitals  -  and it is critical, it is absolutely critical that we get this right.
Whatever options we adopt, we will be adopting them within the context of fundamental fiscal disciplines.
As I made clear in my opening remarks, the challenge of implementing the Government's commitments has been complicated by the severity of the global economic recession  -  the worst global economic downturn since the Great Depression.
While the Government has substantially increased the public investment in health care during the past 18 months, we face serious fiscal constraints in the years ahead.
As the economic recovery strengthens, the Government will be implementing its plan to return the budget to surplus, which will mean tough decisions, unpopular decisions and some budget cuts.
The Government has set out strict spending targets as part of its medium term fiscal strategy and plan for economic recovery.
This includes returning real spending growth to two per cent once the economy recovers and returns to above-trend growth, until the budget returns to surplus.
The Government's response to the Commission's strategy and its recommendations will be consistent with this fiscal discipline. 
I am mindful that the Commission has recommended the most substantial reform to the structure of our health and hospitals system since the establishment of Medicare.
To undertake reform that delivers better health outcomes to all Australians the Government has three main funding options  -  none of which are mutually exclusive.
The first involves a fundamental rethink of funding responsibilities for service delivery between the Federal and State Governments. 
Second is to drive efficiencies across the health system  -  so that we can do more with less. This has already been demonstrated by our health reforms in this year's Budget.
By targeting areas where a legislated review of the Medicare Safety Net found that a number of doctors were charging excessive fees, the Government was able to deliver a Maternity Services Reform Package to expand choice for expectant mothers and their children right across the country.
Our reforms to private health insurance sought to make arrangements fairer and more sustainable into the future, and ensuring that those with the greatest capacity to pay for their health costs, do so.
The Budget measures mean that no longer will 90 per cent of adult Australians subsidise 10 per cent of Australians on higher individual or household incomes. This will save $1.9 billion over the forward estimates, and $8.7 billion over the period to 2019 - 2020.
The third option involves an examination of the revenue.
As indicated above, the Henry Review of our tax system reports later this year and will allow us to plan our long-term health reforms in the context of our long-term fiscal outlook, to ensure the sustainability of the health care system into the future.
When it comes to health financing, the bottom line is this: we do not have infinite resources to finance health reform.
There will be no blank cheques to the States. And there will be difficult tradeoffs.
As we travel around the country there will be constant tensions between the two fundamental questions relating to health reform.
On one hand, how do we improve the health system, and on the other, how do we make the system sustainable in an environment of budget constraints.
There are no easy answers to these questions so let's not pretend there are. They are all hard, but we intend to get on with the business.
And they are not just questions just for government, but questions for the entire Australian community as well.
And that is why it is doubly important that as a community we engage with these questions and understand the tradeoffs and the challenges that lie ahead.
 To conclude, today I have spoken to you about the reasons for undertaking reform of our health and hospitals system; the Government's reforms to date; our objectives for reform; the case for change, as made by the Commission; the strategic options now being considered by Government; the reasons for our decision-making process for the period ahead; and the fiscal constraints within which we will operate.
But where does the rubber really hit the road in all of this? It is with individual Australians who deserve the best health care in the world, and that is our objective.
People who every day ask themselves pretty basic questions like this:
Why is it that my GP, cardiologist and pharmacist have each given me a different drug and how do I know whether I should be taking all of these?
Why is it that my partner and I have to take a day off work to take the kids to the doctor?
Why does my child need to wait for so long for help in the emergency department?
Why is my elective surgery so often postponed?
Why is it that mental health problems are so often picked up by our police and drug and alcohol workers, not by our health services?
Would things be better if we all did more to stop people from getting sick in the first place?
And how can Australians be confident that we'll still have the access to the new life-saving drugs and technologies when the health system is going to face such pressures in the future?
I know and the Government knows that health care reform won't be easy.
In fact, it will be one of the hardest areas of reform to be embraced by this Government.
No doubt we'll hear many voices advocating simplistic solutions to these complex problems  -  simplistic solutions that ignore the totality of the system.  
That will be of course, their democratic right, and I welcome such contributions.  The Government welcomes the debate.
But our job as the Government is to make the hard decisions that strike the balance of delivering a health care system that works for all Australians and a health care system that all Australians can afford.
I conclude where I began today. Our mission is to end the blame game - for a system where the Prime Minister can and should say that the buck stops with me.
And these principles define the course of action that we have now embarked upon with this report  -  and the decisions the nation must take to build the health and hospital system that Australia needs for the 21st century.
I thank you for your attention.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
Two years ago, I stood before you as Labor leader and said that Australia stood at the crossroads.
That Australia faced a choice between the past and the future.
Two years later, we gather here as a Federal Labor Government because Australia chose the future.
Throughout our history, we have always been the party of the future.
Always prepared to look beyond the horizon.
Always prepared to be bold and to imagine what Australia could be at its absolute best.
Always prepared to paint a broad and inclusive canvas on what our possibilities as a nation might be  -  rather than simply being content with the way things were.
Because ours is a message of hope; our opponents a message of fear. And as we all know, fear so often is a more potent emotion than hope.
Ours has been a mission to build up, rather than to tear down.
Ours has been a mission to include, rather than to exclude.
Ours has always been a message of fairness for all, rather than privilege for some.
Ours has been a message aimed at the better angels of our human nature, rather than the worst.
These, in all fundamental respects, continue as the dividing lines of our national political life  -  as real today as they were 100 years ago.
For more than one hundred years of our national political history, our challenge has been to obtain political office to translate these great values into policies that change the lives of working people.
And as you as delegates know, this is no easy task.
Conference after conference, we have assembled to pass resolution after resolution:
     * on reconciliation with Aboriginal people;
     * on Australia's refusal to ratify the Kyoto Protocol;
     * on the obscenity of the industrial relations regime from the waterfront dispute through to WorkChoices;
     * on the obscenity of the treatment of refugees under the Pacific Solution; and on Australia's involvement in the Iraq War.
These resolutions represented the consistency of our purpose and the conviction of our resolve.
They reflected the heart and the soul of so much of our party and our movement.
They reflected the most deeply held beliefs and aspirations of each and every one of you as delegates to this, our party's, conference.
They embodied what you, as the party of true believers, held to be positions of fundamental principle.
Yet, at the same time, year after year, conference after conference, our resolutions progressively became essays in political futility and frustration.
But in 2007, after twelve long years, our party and our movement prevailed.
We prevailed because of the consistency of our purpose.
We prevailed because of the essential decency of our message.
We prevailed because of the discipline of our politics.
And the result: in less than eighteen months in office:
     * an Australian Labor Government apologised to the stolen generations;
     * an Australian Labor Government ratified Kyoto; an Australian Labor Government threw out WorkChoices once and for all;
     * an Australian Labor Government abolished the Pacific Solution; and
     * an Australian Labor Government withdrew our remaining combat forces from Iraq.
All made possible through the party of true believers.
Keeping the faith  -  as you have done.
Fighting the fight  -  as you have done.
Securing political victory  -  as you have done.
Because you, the women and men of our branches and our unions, have never lost sight of the light on the hill  -  and for this, as your leader, and from the bottom of my heart, I thank you.
I have said before, we are a party both proud of our history and confident of our future.
Throughout our history, we have been driven by two great overriding purposes: the first, a fair go for working families; the second, nation-building for Australia's future.
These traditions are writ large across our history.
It was Andrew Fisher who, one hundred years ago, delivered the age pension, workers' compensation and industrial arbitration.
And it was Fisher as nation-builder who gave us a national bank, a national currency, a national coat-of-arms, a trans-continental railroad across the mighty Nullarbor, a national capital, and our own navy under our own national command.
A generation later, it was Curtin and Chifley who delivered social security for the unemployed, the pharmaceutical benefits scheme for subsidised medicine, the post-war immigration scheme that built the fabric of modern multicultural Australia.
And it was Curtin and Chifley as nation-builders who began the great Snowy hydro scheme, founded a national university for the nation's capital and forged Australia's independent standing in the councils of the world.
And so too with Whitlam, with Hawke and with Keating: opening our universities to all on the basis of merit, rather than to the few on the basis of privilege, the establishment of universal health care for all on the basis of need, rather than just some on the basis of those who could pay, together with universal superannuation for working families to underpin a decent retirement for all, not just for some.
And as nation-builders, these living greats of our party gave us national investment in infrastructure for our cities, the internationalisation of our economy and the revitalisation of our industry.
Delegates, this is the tradition of which we are so proud.
And this is the tradition which now shapes the future we would craft for Australia.
A fair go for working families.
Nation-building for Australia's future.
Neither  -  neither  -  being possible without the active agency of government.
It has often been Labor's lot to form government at times of national adversity.
And so too has it been with this Government.
The global financial crisis, which began in August 2007, has given rise to the worst global economic recession in three quarters of a century.
In 2009, the global economy is projected to shrink for the first time since the war.
What began as a global financial crisis, has become a global economic crisis, which has in turn become a global employment crisis.
This crisis has been caused by a combination of unrestrained greed, unlimited credit and unregulated markets  -  all cornerstones of an ideology of free-market fundamentalism promulgated by the political right over the last decade and more.
Of course, the free-market fundamentalists accept no ideological responsibility for what has occurred.
Instead, governments of the responsible centre have had to step in to clean up the wreckage.
In Australia, we have taken strong, early and decisive action to cushion our economy from the worst impact of the global recession.
We have done so without apology.
We have done so without reservation.
We have done so with absolute conviction.
And that conviction proceeds from one fundamental premise: the paramount importance of jobs. Jobs are not about abstract principles of economics; jobs are about working families, the ability to make ends meet and about fundamental human dignity.
Our strategy has been straightforward: nation-building for recovery.
Supporting jobs, small business and apprenticeships today while investing in the infrastructure our nation needs for tomorrow.
Our strategy combines the two great traditions of our movement: fairness for working families and nation-building for the future.
The Government has acted to guarantee every working Australian's bank deposit  -  to stabilise the financial system.
The Government has acted to treble the first home owners boost  -  to help young Australians buy their first home.
The Government has acted to treble the tax break for business to invest in plant and equipment  -  to keep the economy going.
The Government has acted with a three stage economic stimulus strategy  -  to fill the gap left by a private sector in retreat.
The first stage  -  direct cash payments to pensioners, carers, veterans, farmers in hardship and working families  -  to support the 1.5 million Australians working in retail.
The second stage  -  medium term infrastructure including the biggest school modernisation program in Australia's history, the single biggest investment in social housing in Australia's history, and the biggest investment in energy efficiency measures for all Australian homes.
And the third stage  -  long term infrastructure investments in rail, road, port, universities, TAFEs, hospitals and medical research facilities, urban water projects, clean energy and a national high-speed broadband network.
Seventy per cent of our total stimulus strategy is directed to infrastructure investment.
And the result: as of today, Australia has the fastest growth, the second lowest unemployment, and the lowest debt and deficit of any of the Major Advanced Economies. And while every Major Advanced Economy is in recession, Australia so far is not.
These results are not a random event. They are, in large part, the direct product of government policy intervention.
Notwithstanding what we have done, the road to recovery will be long, hard and uneven  -  with many twists and turns.
Unemployment will continue to rise for some time to come.
That's why the second arm for our strategy for dealing with the global economic recession is aimed explicitly at supporting those who cannot find work.
Our nation-building for recovery plan this year will support more than 200,000 people in work who would otherwise lose their jobs.
And the same for the year after.
But the tragic reality is that many Australians could still lose their jobs.
Our responsibility is not to repeat the mistakes of earlier recessions but instead to intervene early so that those directly affected are provided new skills for when the economy recovers.
Our Jobs and Training Compact includes a Compact with Local Communities  -  with local employment coordinators being appointed to twenty regions across our country where unemployment is rising most rapidly.
The second part of our Jobs Compact is our Compact with Australians who have been retrenched through no fault of their own.
Under this plan, the Government is guaranteeing training, supported by our productivity places program, so that during a period of extended unemployment, these retrenched Australians can pick up new skills to use as the economy recovers.
Finally, our Compact with Young Australians, where our policy is simple: young Australians under the age of 25 will be required to be earning or learning  -  either in full time employment or in full time education or training.
No ifs, no buts, no maybes.
Delegates, the Government I lead will not stand idly by while thousands of young Australians have their hopes crushed by a global recession not of their own making.
That's why we are determined to act.
Between June 2008 and June 2009, the number of unemployed 15 to 24 year olds has increased by 60,000 to 255,000  -  an increase of 30 per cent.
This rise is primarily the result of school leavers being unable to find work.
Today I announce a further measure to assist young Australians during this difficult time in our economy.
The Government will now create 50,000 new green jobs, traineeships and apprenticeships aimed chiefly at helping young Australians to obtain new skills during the downturn  -  new skills which will be become highly applicable in the low carbon economy of the future.
The climate change sceptics constantly scare-monger about the possible loss of jobs through the transition to a lower carbon economy.
But they constantly fail to talk about the new clean energy jobs of the future which will arise from the introduction of the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, the renewable energy target and energy efficiency measures in the future.
Specifically, these fifty thousand positions will be made up of:
     * 4000 disadvantaged job seekers participating in the current insulation program;
     * 6000 local green jobs through the jobs fund;
     * 10,000 places in a new National Green Jobs Corps;
     * 30,000 trainees and apprentices in priority sectors of the building and construction sectors and other trades, where places will concentrate across the range of “green skills” competencies that will be needed in the future. These will be achieved through a new National Green Skills Agreement and will start building a new skill base in existing industries and cutting-edge industries, and create jobs and opportunities for generations to come.
The practical job-ready skills included in this training will include:
     * Training electricians in the installation of solar energy;
     * Training plumbers in the installation of water-recycling, plumbing systems; and
     * Training workers in the booming home insulation industry and the retro-fitting of buildings to reduce energy consumption
Taken together, our Nation-Building for Recovery plan and our Jobs Compact with Australia are designed to help working families see their way through the global economic crisis  -  rather than allow free market forces to throw them to the wolves.
Young peoples' lives who would otherwise be left with little hope.
Young people like 18- year old Matthew Jenkins.
Matthew finished school at the end of last year.
He tried his heart out with local companies to try and find an apprenticeship but there wasn't much around.
Then he saw a piece on the TV news one night about my visit to a company called CO-WYN Builders  -  a family company based in Bankstown, founded in 1954, and run by Kevin and Mark Cohen.
Kev said on the TV news that because of the government's stimulus strategy, he was looking to hire.
Matthew then set about hunting Kev down.
But he had no idea of the name of the company -  nor how he could find it.
Nonetheless he grabbed the yellow pages, made a stack of random calls and hunted them down.
Kev was so impressed with Matthew's attitude that he started work on 1 July as an apprentice carpenter.
I'm told he absolutely loves it. TAFE every Monday. Different jobs on site with Kev's company. And if all goes well, Matthew Jenkins becomes a fully qualified carpenter in just under 4 years.
Our charge as a government is to make thousands of these possibilities available for the young Matthew Jenkins of Australia.
This approach is part and parcel of the responsible, conservative economic management of the government which I lead.
Conservative economic management which expands the role of government when the private economy is in retreat  -  and gradually reduces it as the private economy recovers.
Conservative economic management which will return the Budget as the economy recover and increase Australia's international competitiveness.
It is the right strategy for the economy; it is the right strategy for working families; and it is the right strategy for nation-building for the future  -  the skills and the infrastructure that we will need to lift our global competitiveness once we are through the crisis.
It is also a strategy which only an Australian Labor Government can deliver because we believe unapologetically in the role of government.
Our opponents do not. They believe instead in the magic of the marketplace.
They believe that markets are self-correcting.
They refuse to accept the reality of comprehensive market failure.
As others have written, could it be that the reason that it is called the invisible hand is because it is often not there?
Delegates, notwithstanding these great global challenges, the Government has got on with the business of laying the foundations of our long-term reform agenda for the nation  -  building a stronger Australia, a fairer Australia and an Australia capable of meeting the challenges of the long-term future.
We have done so in a manner consistent with our pre-election commitments to the Australian people.
We are also doing so by harnessing our long-term reform agenda for the nation with the short-term measures being implemented under the nation-building for recovery plan.
This is where nation-building for recovery becomes nation-building for the future.
Prior to the election, the Government committed to a new productivity agenda for the economy by investing in an education revolution.
This Government's education revolution is well and truly underway.
We are implementing our commitment to universal early childhood education by 2013.
We are implementing our commitment to have 790,000 computers installed in schools by 2011 so that years 9 to 12 students have a 1:1 student to computer ratio by 2011.
We are implementing a $2.5 billion roll out of state-of-the-art trades training centres to support all of Australia's secondary schools.
We are implementing a $15 billion school building program for all of Australia's primary and secondary schools, including state-of-the-art libraries, language centres and science centres.
The Government is doubling the investment in Australian schools to achieve our national target of lifting year 12 or equivalent attainment from 75 per cent to 90 per cent by 2015.
We are investing in 712,000 productivity training places to help realise our goal of halving the proportion of 20 to 64 year olds without at least Certificate III level qualifications.
And we're undertaking the biggest long-term investment in higher education and research in Australia's history, including an additional 50,000 students attending university by 2013.
This, delegates, is an education revolution.
A revolution that, combined with our nation-building infrastructure investment, will drive long-term productivity growth.
We also committed to the Australian people that we would build a fairer Australia.
That is why the Government abolished WorkChoices and replaced it with the Fair Work Act to build a fair and balanced industrial relations system for all Australians.
That is why we have introduced the single largest reform to the aged pension.
That is why we are introducing Australia's first national paid parental leave scheme.
That is why we have committed $1.2 billion to a new national homelessness strategy  -  to halve the rate of homelessness by 2020.
And that is why we have made a national apology to indigenous Australians  -  backed by a $4.6 billion investment in a national strategy to close the gap in standards in health, housing, employment, education and life expectancy.
The Government is also honouring its commitments to the Australian people on climate change, water, health and hospital reform  -  embracing many of the great challenges of the future.
Conservative governments of the status quo simply hope that these problems will one day go away.
The truth is they won't.
That is why reformist governments of our tradition believe in tackling these challenges head on.
That is why we have honoured our commitment to ratify Kyoto, to introduce a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme; to introduce a renewable energy target of 20 per cent of total electricity generation by 2020; a new $4.5 billion clean energy initiative, including ground-breaking clean coal technologies and a $1.6 billion investment in what will become the single largest solar energy project anywhere in the world.
That's also why the Government is embracing the challenge of long-term health and hospital reform. Phase one of this reform was the Government's $64 billion Australian Health Care Agreement last November  -  a 50 per cent increase over the previous Agreement and including, for the first time, direct Australian Government investment in hospital emergency departments and elective surgery waiting lists.
Phase two goes to the long-term reform of the system over the next twenty years. The Government commissioned an independent health reform commission to provide recommendations for long-term reform to produce the best system possible in preventative health care, primary health care, our hospitals, our outpatient services, in dental health, mental health and aged care; and with least cost to the taxpayer and individual Australians.
This blueprint for reform is the largest reform agenda to the health and hospital system since the introduction of Medicare.
Delegates, as you can see, this Government has no intention of simply being in government for the sake of being there.
As both a party and a Government of reform, we should be clear-cut about our vision for the nation for the decade ahead.
An economy which is among the most globally competitive.
An economy turbo-charged by 21st century infrastructure  -  fully wired and fully connected, from every part of our vast continent to every part of our vast planet.
An economy with a workforce which is the best educated, best skilled, best trained of any workforce in the world.
A country which prides itself as being the most Asia-literate country in the collective West.
A country which has become a decisive part of the global climate change solution  -  not just an irritating part of the climate change problem.
A country where we, in fact, halve homelessness.
Where we, in fact, close the gap with our indigenous brothers and sisters.
A country where we don't allow the fair go to slide out the back door.
A country where we can hold our head up high in the councils of the world with an independent voice making a difference in our region and in the world.
This, delegates, is the kind of Australia we can build together.
Delegates, this is the 45th national conference of the Australian Labor Party.
You may be surprised to know that only fourteen of those conferences have been held while we have been in government. Thirty-one when we have not.
Of the forty-two House of Representatives elections held since 1901, we have one thirteen and fallen short in twenty-nine.
And of the 108 years of our federated history, Labor has only been in government for 35 of those years  -  just on a third.
These figures should be the cause for sober reflection for us all.
Our resolve from this conference should be to apply every effort, every energy and every discipline to build a long term reformist government for the long-term future.
That is the resolve of the team that I now lead in government.
I say to you with great pride that they are a first-class team, made up of absolutely first-class ministers, including a first-class Deputy Prime Minister in Julia Gillard.
A woman of extraordinary strength, extraordinary energy and extraordinary conviction.
Delegates, this Labor Government has embarked on the road to reform.
Just as the nation, when confronted with Australia at the crossroads at the last election, voted to take the road to the future.
The nation took the right road.
Too many opportunities have been squandered in the past.
We can squander them no longer.
I remain an unapologetic optimist about Australia's long-term future.
The threats are real, the challenges are great but so too are the opportunities extraordinary.
As a party, as a government and as a nation, let us seize those opportunities together  -  because, as a nation, we are all in this together.
Mr President, I formally move Chapter One: “Governing for Australia's long-term future”.


 What a great day for the Australian labour movement, when we gather together to honour one of our heroes. It is a great day indeed. 
To Bob and to Blanche you are welcome, welcome friends among us here today. 
Bob is 79 years old. How is it that he does not change? 
I said to him yesterday, “How is it that you don't change?” And Jill, the second miracle, is how have you stayed with him for 26 years? But more of that later. 
Bob Hawke, the heart and soul of our movement, the heart and soul of our Party and I believe also, the heart and soul of our nation Australia. 
Today we come to honour him, not because he's some sort of living saint. I don't think Bob would aspire to that status. In fact Bob, none of us can, least of all me and I'm sure not you, as well, and sainthood is possibly best postponed to another life. 
No, we honour him because he dreamed big dreams for Australia, and then got on with the business of dedicating every fibre of his being to turning those dreams into the reality of modern Australia. 
To dream is one thing. To build and to begin the building is another. To stay the course through to when the building is done, well, that's a third, but with RJ Hawke, we get the trifecta  -  the dreamer, the builder, the bloke who stays with it through to the end. 
The achievements are vast. Just think about them for a moment. 
In politics: the biggest Labor election win since Curtin of 1943; four successive Labor governments; the longest serving Australian Labor Prime Minister. 
On the economy: tariff reform; the floating of the dollar; the internationalisation of the economy; taking Australia out of the economic dark ages and embarking upon our future in the world economy. 
On social and environmental reform: the introduction of Medicare; the near doubling of Year 12 retention rates in schools; the decision to save the Franklin; great advances in reconciliation with Aboriginal people. 
And on Australia's place in the world: there he was, with the idea to set up the first ever pan-regional body designed to bring cooperation in the wider Asia-Pacific region, APEC; the Cambodian peace settlement; the chemical weapons convention. 
This was not an idle government. They did a few things. They did a lot. This is the report card worthy of a great government, a great leader, a great Labor Prime Minister in Bob Hawke.
Bob Hawke was and remains a Labor moderniser, holding fast to our continued values, our continuing values of a fair go for all and nation building for all, while never fearful of applying those continuing values to the great challenges that we face for the future. 
To survive Labor must always be a dynamic movement, never a static movement. To survive Labor must always be broadening the tent, never narrowing it, broadening it to include business, large and small; broadening it to embrace all working people, unionised and not; broadening it to embrace all communities, rural and urban; broadening it to embrace all peoples, whatever their race, whatever their creed, whatever their gender - in this great single enterprise called Australia. 
And to survive Labor must always be looking to the future, never rooted in the past. Never locked in past battles, always ahead of the curve, looking for the next. Preparing Australia for the enormous challenges of the 21st Century, the complexity and the magnitude of which put into pale significance those we have seen in the century just passed. 
Bob Hawke, the great achiever, the great moderniser, but also, the great unifier. 
I'll let you into a little secret: Bob and I had a little tipple last night, and we talked a little bit about today, and I asked him to reflect on his career and what made him most proud. What were the things that were the most important? 
His answer, I believe, says everything about the man. The thing of which he's most proud was his role, the role he was able to play in bringing the nation together after nearly a decade of ugly division, and those of us with memories alive enough and active enough can remember how bad things got in the decade following the dismissal of 1975. 
Here we had, in this great Labor leader, this great Labor Prime Minister, a man who saw the challenge as being to unify the nation  -  and he did so. 
Remember the summits, summits that brought the nation together around a new reform agenda for the future. Summits that entrenched the ideas of reconciliation, of recovery, and of reconstruction, bringing the nation together as only RJ Hawke could. 
Himself a great bridge between all side of politics, between all parts of the economy and all parts of our nation, and only as Hawkey could. 
Hawkey the larrikin, the lovable larrikin. Hawkey, none of us will forget his marvellous advice to all employers on the morning after the Americas Cup win, summed up, I believe, succinctly for all times. Hawkey the mad keen punter, Hawkey the life and soul of the Party, and not just our Party, and Hawkey the great campaigner, the man who not only campaigned because he had to but because he loved to. The excitement, the drama of direct engagement with the Australian people whom he loved and who loved him, as they still today. 
You know, Hawkey has lost none of that old magic. As a new candidate, and as a new member of parliament, Hawkey did shopping centres with me. Picture it, there you stand, the new candidate or, the election later, the just-new member, and you might have hoped in your heart of hearts that you'd made some impression on your local community. But if you're standing with RJ Hawke, you're experience is as follows: to be totally ignored, to be knocked over in the rush, as the entire shopping centre positively swoons in his presence, a collective going weak at the knees. 
That's what happened when Hawkey would arrive at the shopping centre with you  -  a humbling experience for a candidate, and a member, particularly one who had tabs on himself like me. 
You laughed too loudly, Riordan. 
And, that was 10 years after he was last in office. It was nearly 20 years after he had first become Prime Minister, and that says so much of the man. There he was, at it again, aged 78, in the campaign of 2007, cutting a swathe through the shopping centres and RSLs and bowls clubs of Australia, and no more so than in a seat called Bennelong. 
I developed a fleeting impression that for Bob, Bennelong was personal - the passion, the commitment, the dedication as he personally introduced himself to all 87,000 voters. The victory in Bennelong, Bob, is in large part you. I thank you for that. 
But not just campaigning there  -  right across the nation. In one of his last articles, written before his tragic death in November 2007, the great journalist Matt Price wrote the following of Hawkey on the campaign trail in Perth: 
“Bob Hawke barely paused to draw breath during a rousing, passionate speech that didn't so much persuade his friendly audience to vote Labor as harangue them into submission... 
“Like a mysterious force of nature, his speech ploughed ever forward, uprooting those in its path.” 
And at the end of the speech, Matt reported the following exchange: 
‘“How does it feel to be feted like a rock star?” wondered a local TV reporter. “I've got used to it, boy,” snapped Hawke.” And then he went on to say “If it helps Labor, I can cope.”' 
Bob, you are loved by our Party, you are loved by our movement, and I believe you are loved by the nation. 
We salute you, Bob Hawke  -  great achiever, great moderniser, great unifier, and we today, as a Party and as a movement, extend to you the honour of Federal Life Membership of the great Australian Labor Party.


E &amp; O E  -  PROOF ONLY
PM: Thank you very much ladies and gentlemen. Today we've been discussing the big challenge of climate change, and in particular with our colleagues from the Pacific Island countries, the impact on them, and what needs to be done globally in order to deal with that impact in the future. That is why the Government today, of Australia, is of course launching this document, engaging our Pacific neighbours on climate change, and Australia's approach.
We in Australia see ourselves as having a particular responsibility to argue the case of Pacific Island countries in the major global fora on climate change. Most recently, at the G20, on top of that, the Major Economies Forum meeting in L'Aquila in Italy, and prospectively in other meetings around the world as well.
The document describes the potential impact of climate change on the Pacific Island countries, severe economic impacts, including reduced income from agricultural exports, from fisheries, and from tourism.
Secondly, storm surges - flooding and coastal erosion, threatening coastal settlements. Thirdly, exacerbation of the existing problems of water security. Fourthly, threats also to food security. And on top of that, changes to the distribution of disease bearing organisms like mosquitoes potentially making worse existing threats to human health.
These are the challenges which are the real practical challenges affecting our friends, our neighbours and partners in the island countries of the Pacific.
On the question of coastal inundation, let me just present you with one simple, stark fact. Fifty per cent of the population of the Pacific Island countries live within a kilometre and a half of the coastline. Fifty per cent of the population of the Pacific Island countries live within a kilometre and a half of the coastline.
Therefore, when we talk about inundation, when we talk about sea levels rising, this is not an abstract concept, it is real.
And today, the Minister for Climate Change, Penny Wong, was able to present delegates, also, with a graphic video representation of inundation at work in Kiribati. And the distinguished representatives from Kiribati will speak to that and other matters in a minute.
On the practical side, what do we then propose to do as Australia - As outlined in this document, we intend to provide support for practical measures to assist Pacific Island countries to adapt to the impact of climate change. Secondly also, to incorporate climate change into the national development strategies of the Pacific Island countries, in partnership with countries like Australia.
Thirdly, we in Australia ensuring that we take the Pacific experience of climate change to the councils of the world. In many parts of the world, this is seen as an exclusive problem of how the large developed economies adapt or how the largest developing economies may change.
One of the practical and immediate problems is what happens to our friends and neighbours and partners in the region as they deal with the living, graphic reality of a coastal village disappearing. That's what it's about. And also, to contribute to better coordination between ourselves and other donor countries for development assistance cooperation in the Pacific so that climate change is at the forefront of what we do.
These are the measures which are outlined in this document. These are some of the problems we identify in this problem, this area; and therefore, the challenge which Australia believes it has to rise to, in acting on behalf of this region, to the greatest extent we can in the councils of the world as we move towards the Conference in Copenhagen.
I'm pleased today to be joined by the Prime Minister of Vanuatu, and the distinguished representative from Kiribati. I might turn to the Prime Minister of Vanuatu to add some remarks and then to our colleague from Kiribati, and then Penny Wong will close before I take questions from you. Prime Minister.
PM NATAPEI: Thank you Prime Minister. I simply wish to add that Vanuatu is located on this, what they call the (inaudible) of fire, where we have cyclones, earthquakes, volcanic eruption, tsunami. We've got the lot. And indeed, about two years ago, we had to relocate an entire village, (inaudible) in the northern part of the country, from where it used to be, further inland - basically because the existing of the original site went underwater.
That's just demonstrating what Prime Minister Rudd has been talking about, the sea level rise. And even now, some of the plantations, as you drive along the roads along the coast, you'll see coconut trees in the water. So it's an indication of the sea level rise.
About a week and a half ago, I visited some of the islands up in the north, and there's evidence there of what's happening to the sea level rise that is affecting people in the country, and I assume that that also is affecting the rest of the Pacific Island countries.
PM RUDD: Thank you very much Prime Minister. And the representative from Kiribati.
LAMBOURNE: Thank you Prime Minister. Kiribati is one of the front line countries to the impact of climate change. We are made up of low-lying (inaudible) which rise no more than two metres above sea level in average. The islands themselves are narrow strip of lands, that when, some part of the islands, when you stand in the middle, you can see the ocean on one side, and the lagoon on the other side.
So the storm surges that we've experienced over the years have been more intense and more frequent and they've destroyed lots of our homes, our livelihood, in terms of our food crops; and infrastructure. Very critical infrastructure.
And since the release of the fourth assessment report of the IPCC, we've been very much concerned about the projections of sea level rise which some subsequent scientific findings have found very conservative. So the IPCC report, forward assessment report, states that the sea level will rise between 0.4 - 0.8 metres within this century.
Now for some that might seem insignificant. Before my country, Kiribati, and most of the low-lying nations in this region of the world, that is quite an alarming rate. Because before our islands are inundated by the rising seas, they will be unable to support life.
And so this is a very crucial and very critical issue for Kiribati, and the Government, my President, has been speaking on this, and to this, at every opportunity he gets. And I'd like to thank the, on his, on my President's behalf, thank the Government of Australia for its leadership in this area. Since the Rudd Government came into office, they ratified the Kyoto Protocol which all of us in the region, and of course, across the world, welcomed and acknowledged, and are very thankful for.
Australia has taken a leading role in our region, on climate change, and I think it is very fitting that this year's forum is chaired by Australia. It has done a lot since, in the very short period it has come into office. It has done a lot.
Lots of assistance has been extended to our region to adapt - help us adapt to the impact of climate change. The assistance of Australia adaptation program in the $350 million which will focus on the programs in the Pacific, are very much appreciated and welcomed by our governments in the region. The meetings, the international meetings that Australia has attended - it's also provided us, through Australia, the opportunity to be heard.
Australia has kindly taken our issues to these fora and advocated our positions at these international meetings where we do not participate. So we are very grateful to the Government of Australia and we look for the Government of Australia to take the lead in the climate change action for our region. And we are very confident that as chair of the Pacific Islands forum this year for the next 12 months Australia and particularly the Prime Minister of Australia and the Minister for Climate Change and their team will be helping us tell the world what is happening in our region and to our people.
And I think in Copenhagen we're looking for practical and concrete solutions to help our people who may not be able to continue to live on the lands that their ancestors have lived for a long long time. This is an emotional issue for us, but an issue that needs to be addressed very soon and without much delay. Thank you very much.
PM RUDD: Thank you very much. And if I could ask Senator Wong to conclude and then we'll take some questions.
MINISTER WONG: Thank you, Prime Minister. Well the Pacific Island nations represented here and Australia share many common concerns, many common issues but perhaps none more pressing than climate change. And you've heard the representative from Kiribati talk about the real life issues that are confronting her nation as a result of climate change. That is a view that has been expressed very much by Pacific Island nations including in this forum.
We do regard it as important that we engage closely with the Pacific region on an issue where we share a common concern because as you know and as we discussed today Australia too is vulnerable to climate change as has been demonstrated by Professor Garnaut's review and many other reports.
So this document is to guide our engagement with the region. It sets out a range of priorities that will guide our engagement with the region. It's consistent with the approach we said we would take to the last election, and of course the first amongst these priorities is an effective global solution to climate change.
We need an effective agreement at Copenhagen, that means we have to take action at home and it also means that the voice of these island nations who have such a compelling story to tell about their experience and the risks that they face in the future must also be heard in the international discussions. Thank you.
PM RUDD: Thanks very much, Minister and thank you colleagues. And questions, over to you.
JOUNALIST: Prime Minister what have you learnt [inaudible]
PM RUDD: One cold hard statistic, and not from the report itself but from the presentations we had this morning, and that was the figure I referred to before - 50 per cent of the populations of the Pacific Island nations lying within 1.5 kilometres of the coast. I'd heard before about the challenges of Kiribati, the challenges of Tuvalu, the challenges of the low lying atolls, but to also hear, as the Prime Minister of Vanuatu has just indicated, but also from the Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea this morning, reflections on communities now being inundated, and then to reflect on the physical dimensions of that - half the populations of these island countries lying in the pathway of coastal inundation.
That's in terms of what I've learnt. In terms of the course of action it underlines afresh, I believe, Australia's responsibility to argue as clearly and as cogently and as effectively as we can the interests of our friends and neighbours in the councils in the world on which we are active on climate change.
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
PM RUDD: We believe that on the adaptation measures - well first thing, the key challenge now on the road to Copenhagen is to come up with a series of actions by governments in developed and developing countries to make a difference on climate change itself. That's the first thing. Rather than just saying it's all too hard, it's all too difficult.
That's the first responsibility, and when you look at the immediate impacts of inundation and the related problems I referred to before, it underlines the need to act.
Secondly there are other adaptation mechanisms as well. For example we heard a presentation this morning from one of our regional colleagues about the building of sea walls. This is an expensive business and in certain communities where there are larger populations that is already underway.
Thirdly the security of peoples is of course a wider concern for the entire international community, and we are members of the international community. Each of these needs to be considered in its sequence. Our first responsibility is to get a good outcome in Copenhagen because those in the front line of the impact of climate change are within our own region, and we have a responsibility to act.
JOUNALIST: Prime Minister do you believe there should be a [inaudible]
PM RUDD: I would take advice on such questions. On the direct impact on peoples it's quite plain that, based on conversations I had with the Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea, villages have had to be relocated. Now they've been relocated inland. Where do you stop and start in terms of internal refugees within countries whose normal livelihoods have been the same for generations and in many cases centuries, are now disrupted and required to move internally within a country. As you know internally displaced persons is a category in international humanitarian law. But more broadly than that I think we'd take advice.
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
PM RUDD: I listened carefully to what the Premier of Niue had to say this morning. And, as I said in my remarks also, I believe he's been an excellent chairman of the Pacific Island Forum, and I draw your attention carefully to the content of his remarks.
Secondly what the Premier of Niue has said to us on many occasions now is that nobody in the region can afford to turn a blind eye to what is going on in Fiji - I'll come back to the immediacy of your question in one minute - underlined most recently by these extraordinary arrests of religious leaders in Fiji.
The fact that a leader of the Methodist church can have their door banged on in the middle of the night and be taken off by the authorities, whacked into jail, then charged with some trumped up offence under the emergency regulations put out by the military Government of Fiji is profoundly disturbing.
Across the island countries of the Pacific where religious communities, including the Methodist church who have been most recently affected by these events in Fiji, I believe this is leading to profound, even more profound disquiet.
I believe what the Premier of Niue was referring to was that the peoples of Fiji themselves ought also to be seized of the challenges which their democracy now faces as well as the challenges which the region at large faces.
We advocate and strongly advocate a peaceful solution to the challenges which lie ahead.
(inaudible) a peaceful solution in which the people's of the region and the people's of Fiji must equally engage.
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]
PM RUDD: I would emphasise in absolutely clear-cut terms the importance of a peaceful solution to the problems which exist within Fiji. They are real problems. I've described their most recent manifestation. And that is one of the reasons why the countries of the Pacific Island Forum met in Papua New Guinea earlier this year and agreed on a mechanism for the suspension of Fiji from the councils of the forum. Sorry, mate?
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]
PM RUDD: I think I've already made my views clear about what this matter raises in terms of fundamental questions about Mr Turnbull's judgement, his integrity and his character, and his fitness to hold office. And I don't propose to add to those remarks here today. I now believe it's properly a matter for the Liberal Party.
JOURNALIST: [indistinct] 45 per cent cuts in global greenhouse gas emissions. That's a much stronger target than Australia and New Zealand are proposing. I wonder how you reconcile [indistinct]?
PM RUDD: Obviously our friends and partners in the region want maximum action across the world. If you stand back from all of this, what is necessary - and this was the subject for the discussion in the Major Economies Forum in L'Aquila early last month. Action by developed countries, action by developing countries, which together would make a difference for the future, and remember, the targets which was discussed in L'Aquila about two degrees centigrade.
Obviously we're going to need action from both. Obviously the small island states who are those who I just described before as the most vulnerable, want maximum action from all parties, and that's just been the subject of discussion we've had in there today.
We, in our calls to the international community as the Government of Australia, will be taking that strong message when we go to the next round of discussions at the Pittsburgh Summit, the G-20, the special session in the United Nations on the climate change convention, which is being convened by the Secretary-General of the UN at the same time, through to Copenhagen itself.
The minister also has, I think, three preparatory committee meetings to attend between now and Copenhagen (inaudible) next week? Very soon. And another couple, I think in Bangkok and Barcelona between now and the end of the year.
The message we take to all of them is maximum action. You've got to achieve a consensus in this business because you need a globally agreed set of outcomes.
But the good thing about having Mr Yvo de Boer here this morning, as Secretary of the UN Framework Convention Committee, is for him also to be able to brief firsthand colleagues about what the current state of play is within negotiations. It's fair to say it's tough and it's hard. But it's a challenge for all of our respective political wills. 
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, the process [indistinct] relocation of large numbers of people, as you've indicated. Some can be relocated inside their own countries. I'd like to know whether the ministers here feel that [inaudible]
PM RUDD: As I said before, and my colleagues will answer in their own terms, but as I said before let's be blunt about the order of priorities here. One, a set of actions agreed to by the international community which minimise the impact of coastal inundation as we minimise the impact of climate change by taking the mitigation measures which are outlined in the possible contents of a new framework agreement, and the various national actions which have been undertaken including here in Australia.
Second thing, of course, is the other, shall I say, physical mitigation measures of the type we discussed, including internal relocation of what would then become environmentally internally displaced persons. And, thirdly, wider international responsibilities.
I believe we need to go through each of those stages, as it appropriate. Can I just turn to my colleagues if they wish to comment further on it.
PM NATAPEI: In Vanuatu's case, we have 83 islands. The islands are not low so we won't be looking to Australia to relocate our people. We would simply need assistance through our national adaptation program to relocate people within our country.
LAMBOURNE: For Kiribati, we are in a different situation because, as I've explained before, the geography of our islands may mean - based on that IPCC assessment report, may mean a relocation of our people. This is the worse case scenario under the projections of this report.
This is an option too that the government of my country is looking into. And it has come up with a solution  -  well, a strategy, not a solution. We hope it will be a solution in the end. But it is a strategy and an option - long-term option that it is providing to the people. And that is - we call it the merit based relocation.
And just to say at the outset that my country and I guess a lot of people in our region, we are very proud people. And certainly my government does not want the people of Kiribati to be relocated as refugees. We do not accept that. We do not want to be labelled as refugees.
But what the government has put in place is a strategy to up-skill the people and up-skill them so that they have international standard of qualifications that they can use overseas and maybe fill labour gaps that exist in countries. Maybe if Australia needs labour that we can provide, then that's the strategy that we're looking for, and we're looking at, not merely relocation as refugees.
PM RUDD: I think also - I'll come to you again, Tim in a sec. - to draw your attention to page 12 of the report that is being released at the moment, which deals with climate change and displacement.
And that's, there is no point pushes this to one side and pretending it's not a problem; it is, and needs to be dealt with. And various broad frameworks for action are canvassed there but it's a challenge for us all, and I note carefully what my colleagues have just had to say.
Also in terms of our national action, bear this in mind: it's not just reaching global targets, it's not just reaching global mechanisms and technology platforms to make all that possible, it's national actions as well, including the proper enforcement of emissions trading schemes within individual national governments.
And in Australia we know full well it's eight days before we've got to vote in the Senate on climate change and on the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme. That is one of the building blocks nationally, when added to other actions around the world, which make a difference. And that's why there are not just compelling national reasons in terms of business certainty in Australia but international reasons why we need to get on with the business of getting that thing through the Senate. Eight days' time the vote occurs.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, should military personnel or civilian personnel guard Australia's military bases?
PM RUDD: Tim, the first and foremost responsibility of government is national security. Secondly, within that, to make sure our defence forces themselves are also properly protected.
Yesterday I convened a meeting of the National Security Committee of the Cabinet following events which unfolded yesterday morning in Melbourne. I asked two questions of the Defence leadership, both civilian and military. One was the adequacy of our current protection of facilities now. And the second was whether, in the light of recent events, they needed to be further reviewed.
On the first of those questions, Defence's advice is that their current arrangements, in their judgement, are adequate but they will now undertake an immediate and comprehensive review of security needs for our Defence bases including the appropriateness or otherwise of continuing to use civilian contractors. That I think, is the responsible course of action, given the events of the last 24 hours. Last question.
JOURNALIST: [Inaudible]
PM RUDD: Normally, in handling the matters of proscription or prospective proscription of an organisation, we deal with these matters confidentially within Government based on the expert advice available to us. And it is far better that we do not engage in extensive public commentary on that process while it is underway.
You would have heard what I have said in my remarks yesterday about the importance of the fact that for quite some months our security agencies have been engaged in a particular operation. And we have been very mindful of the need to preserve the integrity of that particular operation.
On the question of the proscription or otherwise of a particular organisation, including the one to which you just refer, we believe that has to be handled confidentially within the proper processes of government. And, having said that, folks, I've got to get back to chair the conference.


 E &amp; OE  -  PROOF ONLY  
If I could just echo those remarks about the wonderful young people from Cairns State High. Thank you for your song and your celebration with us today. 
And also, earlier, of course, that remarkable performance from Seaman Dan. Anyone who could begin his singing career at 70  and be rolling on the way in which he is, I presume, nearing 80, as my colleague said to me quietly over my shoulder as he was singing, “there is hope yet for us all.” 
Post-politics, new career options present themselves to us all. 
Forum Leaders; other delegation leaders; ministerial colleagues; distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. 
Welcome to Australia. Welcome to Queensland.  Welcome to the great city of Cairns and welcome to this, the 40th Pacific Islands Forum Leaders meeting. 
I begin by acknowledging the first Australians on whose land we meet and whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history. For us in Australia, that is a matter of great pride - the fact that we now share this wonderful continent with our Indigenous Australians, our Indigenous brothers and sisters, who take us back to the dreamtime. 
I also acknowledge the traditional owners of this land, the Gimuy Walubara Yidinji People  -  and thank you for that Welcome to Country from Seith Fourmile. 
Ladies and gentlemen, it is 15 years since Australia last hosted the Pacific Islands Forum. 
So it is with great personal pleasure, that on behalf of the Australian Government, that I am here this morning as the incoming chair of this year's Forum. 
It is entirely appropriate that we have this meeting here in Cairns  -  a great Australian city, a city that has very close links with the Pacific island nations; personal ties, business ties, cultural ties. 
This is a great city, it is a city with a great civic culture, and I am sure that the people of Cairns will continue to make you feel welcome you here during your time with us in Australia. They are renowned as people of great hospitality and friendship, and I know already that has been extended to my Forum colleagues so far. 
I would also like to thank the outgoing Chair of the Forum, Premier Toke Talagi of Niue, for his outstanding work as Chair of the Forum over the last and challenging 12 months. 
I would acknowledge my friendship with him, and the strong leadership he has shown for the people of Niue, but most critically at this difficult time, leadership also for the Pacific Island Forum. Toke  -  congratulations for your leadership on behalf of us all. 
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General, Neroni Slade for his comments, and for the excellent work he has done in preparation for this Forum, and for the excellent work of the Secretariat which he leads. 
And I would also most particularly like to thank you, the leaders of the Pacific, in advancing the work that we have done so far, and the work which still lies ahead of us in the days ahead, and in the years ahead. 
In 2008, not long after the Government which I lead was elected, I paid a visit to the Grand Chief in Port Moresby and to the Prime Minister of the Solomon Islands in Honiara. It was one of my first visits abroad as Prime Minister. 
And through those visits I wished to underline one core fact  -  that we, the Australian Government, wished to reinvigorate our engagement with our Pacific Island neighbours. 
At that time I issued the Port Moresby Declaration that set out our principles, Australian principles, that would guide our partnerships with the Pacific Island Nations  -  principles of mutual respect, principles of mutual responsibility. 
And we have sought to put those principles into action by setting up our Pacific Partnerships for Development  -  with the Millennium Development Goals at their core. 
We have also put those principles into action through a renewed focus on our engagement with the Pacific Islands Forum. 
This Forum has a long and successful history of bringing the nations and leaders of our region together to chart a shared course through our common challenges. 
It embodies the values and principles to which we all hold true  -  values of democracy, of mutual respect, and a desire to build a better future for all our nations and all our peoples, whether those nations be large or small. 
It embodies, as the Secretary-General said before, the ‘Pacific Way'. 
One of the wonderful things about our region is that we bring together so many countries, large and small. It is a great thing that in fact we have just been led as a Forum by the Premier of Niue, whose population is barely a thousand or two, and across our family of nations within this Forum, countries such as Niue, Nauru, Tuvalu, Palau, the Cook Islands, all countries, all peoples, with populations less than 20,000 people, but for us as friends and partners within the region, their aspirations and needs are as important as any other nation and any other country within our region. 
It does, I believe, reflect the nature of the Pacific Way that we as brothers and sisters within this region take deeply and take personally and take collectively the needs of us all. 
This year our Forum is being held at a time of major global economic crisis. 
Governments in the region and around the world, face an enormous challenge in responding to this crisis. Like all nations, the countries of the Pacific are feeling the impact of a crisis not of their own making. 
And until global economic confidence is fully restored, and until credit flows and financial markets return to normal, our countries will continue to face great economic challenges. 
I believe, however, that there are focused, practical actions that countries can take to reduce the impacts of this crisis. 
And I believe that this meeting of our Forum can set the course that we can take. 
We can agree to take specific actions. 
We can ensure that we deliver sustainable budgets. 
We can ensure that we maintain and improve the delivery of the core services, including health, education and vital infrastructure. 
We must seize the opportunity presented by this years' Forum to build a consensus on how best to respond to the crisis within this, our region.
Donors and recipients must to commit to measurable actions to strengthen development coordination and build our regions' economic resilience for the long term. 
More effective coordination mechanisms between Pacific island countries on the one hand and development partners on the other will help the region achieve real outcomes, including progress towards the Millennium Development Goals. 
We need to do this to make a real difference to the lives of the 2.7 million people living across the Pacific who still, today, live in poverty. 
That is a collective challenge for us all. It is a collective challenge which should focus our every program of action. 
Of course, alongside the global economic crisis, governments are responding to climate change  -  the great challenge of our time, the great challenge also for the island countries of the Pacific. 
We must lift our efforts to deliver the outcome the world and our region needs in Copenhagen. 
The nations of the Pacific are particularly vulnerable to the impacts of climate change and Pacific island nations are among the least responsible for the causes of climate change. 
But they will bear the brunt of its impact the most. We must all act together to meet this challenge. 
We need concerted action  -  domestically, internationally, locally, globally  -  to meet the challenge of climate change. 
Australia is already working with partners in this room to find ways we can adapt to the changes climate change will bring. 
We are working internationally and domestically to mitigate the effects of climate change. 
And we are playing our part in international gatherings  -  including by representing the interests of the Pacific island nations  -  in other international fora where Australia participates, including the G20. 
With only 123 days to go until Copenhagen, the world has a window of opportunity to deal with mitigation and adaptation and to deliver increased financial measures in order to act on climate change. 
We must use every opportunity to recommit ourselves as a region and as an international community to deliver a strong outcome in Copenhagen, necessary for the planet, necessary for the Pacific, necessary for all our peoples. 
I am particularly pleased today that, Mr Yvo de Boer, Executive Director of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change has been able to join us for our discussions as our special guest. 
Climate change is no respecter of persons. Climate change effects all countries, all peoples, from the strongest to the most vulnerable. We therefore, in Australia, take seriously our responsibility to argue forcefully in the forums of the world the interests of our region including some of the most vulnerable states in the world, dealing with the challenge of climate change. 
Climate change  -  a challenge for Australia, a challenge for the Pacific, a challenge for the world, a challenge which requires strong political leadership to bring about real change for future generations. 
Of course we also have other important policy questions ahead of us this week. 
The Forum has made its view clear on the situation in Fiji, and our dismay and the difficulties now confronting the people of Fiji. The fact that in recent times that we have seen the arrest of ministers of religion in Fiji is not the Pacific Way. The people of Fiji deserve better, and we look forward to their return to the family of democracies across our region. 
This week we will need to reflect on how we can urge Fiji to return promptly to democracy, particularly in the light of the deterioration which has occurred in recent months. 
Our trade ministers have recommended we begin negotiations on a new trade and economic agreement  -  something Australia strongly supports as good for the future of the region. 
This agreement will be a critical element of our work to drive closer economic integration and advance progress towards the Millennium Development Goals. 
We also have to consider the challenge of protecting our fisheries. 
Australia is committed to assisting Pacific island countries protect their fisheries  -  a vital resource for the region  -  combating transnational crime and strengthening their maritime security. 
As part of Australia's ongoing commitment, Australia will provide continued support for the Pacific Patrol Boat Program and in consultation with our Pacific partners work towards a new maritime security program to follow it. 
We should also commend the achievements of the Regional Assistance Mission to the Solomon Islands, RAMSI, and I strongly endorse the remarks earlier by the Premier of Niue. We should welcome RAMSI's close partnership with the Solomon Islands Government, led by Prime Minister Sikua. 
And I acknowledge also again publicly the contribution of all regional governments in ensuring that this mission in the Solomons has been a success, while recognising the challenges which continue to lie ahead. 
My fellow leaders, other participants - you are indeed welcome guests in Australia.
You are welcome guests here in Cairns, and your wives and partners are welcome guests as well. And I'm sure Therese will be spending some time with you in the days ahead - and darling, it's nice to have you back from Kilimanjaro  -  in one piece. 
I look forward to working with my colleagues in the days ahead, as we work towards action on the critical challenges which confront us as a region. Action on economic cooperation, action on the better coordination of development assistance into the region, action on the critical challenge of climate change, and action on other practical areas of cooperation about which we spoke over dinner last night, particularly energy security and the future of renewable energy within our region as well. 
These are the practical matters which actually bind us together as a region, together with the underpinning values which we continue to hold dear. 
Distinguished guests, my fellow Forum leaders, ladies and gentlemen, welcome to Cairns. It is great to be here with you in this great city of Australia's north, and with those remarks let us get on with the business of this, the 40th meeting of the Pacific Islands Forum. 
I thank you. 


PM:              Well, the weather Gods have conspired today so that we're inside rather than outside, which you know, Penny and I are very pleased about because we would have been able to display our full range of football skills outside, which you've all been spared, and Chris, you could have showed us something genuinely serious about the skills necessary in the game.
What are we here to do today? It's a great initiative of the AFL which we're supporting as the Government to ensure that this weekend's Green Round in the AFL is about how do we encourage mums and dads, fans, supporters, clubs, players - right across the country on doing their bit to bring down greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, to do their bit on climate change.
Governments do their bit on climate change, and we're having that debate here in Canberra at the moment. But it's important the community does its bit on climate change, and a huge slice of our national community is what happens in footy. I'm told that we've got, on any given weekend, 250,000-300,000 people going to games right across the country. Viewing audiences this weekend, I'm told, is about one million people.
So we have a very simple message as a Government, which is: how do we, as Australians all, do our bit on climate change  -  Government doing its bit, the community doing its bit, and footy fans doing their bit as well. So we're pleased to partner with the AFL on this one.
People ask ‘well, what are the practical things that can be done to bring down carbon pollution?'  Well if you're in a football club, practical stuff like have you got insulation in your ceiling to bring down your overall cost of energy  -  good for the club's electricity bills over time, as well. On top of that, what can you do to bring in a solar hot water system for the showers and the other needs that you've got within the club itself? What can you do with solar panels on the roof? What can you do, also, in terms of encouraging your fans and your supporters to use public transport where that's available? These are the practical things, together with energy efficient light bulbs which all go towards making a difference.
Each club, each player, each footy family making their difference on climate change in Australia because together we can make a difference worldwide. The Government's agreed to contribute up to $200,000 to our new climate change partnership with the AFL. We believe this is a good investment for the future, and we look forward to the AFL being our partners in this so that Australia can make a difference on climate change.
Enough from me, and now I'm turning to Penny  -  over to you.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERYI acknowledge the first Australians on whose lands we meet and whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history.I'm delighted to be here tonight to support the work of the St Vincent's Institute of Medical Research.The work of the talented medical researchers is part of the Australian Government's vision to create the best skilled, best trained and most highly educated workforce in the world.A vision that we are delivering on with the major national investments we are making as we deliver an education revolution, and undertake reform to our health and hospitals system.St Vincent's is a place that undertakes and delivers first class medical research.A place where there have been major medical breakthroughs on diabetes, arthritis, foetal development and breast cancer  -  to name just a few.It's sometimes said in the research world that you have to rely on your hunches.So it seems fitting, in a city synonymous with horse racing, that this Institute was founded on the prize money that the great racehorse trainer Jack Holt won from his Melbourne Cup and Caulfield Cup winners.Jack's £200,000 bequest  -  quite a fortune in 1951 when he died  -  is what got St Vincent's School of Medical Research underway.Imagine what he'd think of the returns on the £200,000 if he could see what St Vincent's has achieved today.There's an old punters' saying that “any price for a winner is a good price”.The same could be said of medical research.It's a tough, painstaking and resource-intensive business.But it's the business of saving lives, making breakthroughs, reducing suffering and making peoples' lives better.And it's worth all the investment of time and resources that we make.Because medical research has played a large role in giving us longer, healthier and happier lives than those of past generations.That is why we're gathered here tonight as St Vincent's launches a new fundraising appeal.Over its history this Institute has been home to a series of world-class, ground-breaking researchers:
 * Pehr Edman, the pioneering inaugural research director of the Institute;
 * Professor Bruce Kemp, whose work has led to a new era in metabolism research, and
 * Michael Parker and the team working on the awful Alzheimer's disease, which robs us of our loved ones while they are still with us.
The excellence achieved as St Vincent's was underscored by last year's round of NHMRC grants.The Institute's success rate for funding was 42 per cent - well above the national average of 27 per cent.One of those successful projects is the work of Dr Louise Purton and Dr Carl Walkley.In 2007 and 2008 they won over $1.5 million in NHRMC funding for their stem cell research.Together, they're making major contributions towards the prevention and treatment of diseases of the blood and bone.We applaud their work, and the work of the whole team at St Vincent's.Tonight I'd like to discuss the Government's plans for health reform and the role of medical research in our reform plans.In the months before the November 2007, one of my clear commitments to the Australian people was to pursue reform of our health and hospitals system.I said we had to stop the blame game.I said that Australians need a health system that is easier to access and navigate.A system with improved quality, greater fairness and better health outcomes.A system that focuses on prevention rather than cure.Early last year we established the National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission to give us advice on how to realise this vision.And last month, we released its final report - the first comprehensive review of the nation's health system in nearly two decades.To put the challenge into perspective, consider the following:We achieve relatively good health outcomes with an expenditure that's below the OECD average, at 9.0 per cent of GDP in 2006-07.Demographic changes will see 1.6 million Australians aged over 85 by 2047, four times as many as there are today.With no policy change, our health and aged care costs are forecast to rise sharply from around 9 per cent of GDP now to 12.4 per cent of GDP a little over two decades from now - from $96.5 billion in 2007-08 to $246.1 billion in 2032-33.We spend just 2 per cent of our health funding on prevention, and 70 per cent on providing acute care.1 out of every 3 Australians who present to public hospital emergency departments and 1 out of every 6 Australians on a waiting list for elective surgery are not seen within a clinically recommended time  -  and this has not changed for some time.650,000 adults are on our public dental waiting lists  -  amongst them, pensioners and lowest income earners  -  with an average wait of two years for essential dental treatment.Some 65 per cent of people who need mental health care go untreated  -  particularly amongst younger Australians where we know early detection and support is most effective.These statistics help paint the Commission's picture of a health system that is at a ‘tipping point'.And they make a strong case for long-term reform.Not just to fix the system for today  -  but also to prepare it for the future.  Having received the Commission's report, the Government has identified seven guiding principles for reform:  * Building a health system with an emphasis on people.
 * A focus on prevention rather than cure.
 * Delivering comprehensive primary care.
 * Minimising waiting times for acute care  -  particularly in our emergency departments and for elective services.
 * Improving the care provided after hospital.
 * Providing better access to care, improving the quality and safety of our health care system and achieving better health care outcomes for all Australians.
 * Finally, doing all this more efficiently and cost effectively with a clear delineation of the roles and responsibilities of the Commonwealth and the States.
Having reflected on the advice in the Commission's report, the Government has set out three strategic options for the future.Our first strategic option is a partial takeover of the health system, with the Commonwealth taking responsibility for:
 * all preventative and primary care;
 * all hospital outpatients, dental care and aged care;
 * all non-acute mental health services;
 * 40 per cent of the funding for all acute hospital patients; and
 * and all sub-acute care  -  such as post discharge, rehabilitation and palliative care - delivered outside our hospitals.
This would deliver the most comprehensive health and hospital reforms since the introduction of Medicare.Each of these major changes to responsibilities are underpinned by a series of major reforms across the spectrum of prevention, primary, acute and post-acute care.In prevention and primary care the Commission has recommended:The establishment of an independent National Health Promotion Agency. And the Commonwealth Government undertake full funding responsibility for primary care services.To build hospitals that deliver highly specialised, technical care with improved access to care for patients:
 * National Access Targets to measure whether people are accessing the services they need;
 * ‘activity based funding' of hospitals;
 * Public reporting on performance against national indicators which measure access, efficiency and quality of care;
 * separating elective and emergency services; and
 * strengthening sub-acute health infrastructure to provide more help for people to recover and restore their health following acute intervention.
The Commission also recommends targeting major gaps in our system through:
 * a new National Aboriginal Health and Torres Strait Islander Health Authority.
 * Early investment in mental health services aimed at early intervention.
 * Flexible arrangements and top-up funding for our rural and regional areas.
 * And in the area that today has become a marker of inequality in Australia - dental health  -  a proposal for universal access to dental care along with a nationwide expansion of pre-school and school dental programs.
Central to these reforms is to improve the efficiency and performance of our health system through the implementation of a patient-controlled electronic health record for all Australians.The Commission estimates that this entire reform plan comes at an indicative cost  -  to both Commonwealth and State governments - of between $2.8 billion and $5.7 billion in recurrent costs per year.In addition, the Commission's report recommends between $4.3 billion and $7.5 billion in one-off capital costs.The Australian Institute of Health and Welfare has estimated that these reforms would reduce spending by $4 billion per year two decades from now.The second strategic option that arises from the report is to do all I have just mentioned as the first stage of reform.Followed by a second stage of reform with the Commonwealth moving to increase its share of funding for acute hospital patients to 100 per cent. The third strategic option is to undertake strategic options one and two simultaneously  -  which the Commission explicitly recommends against. The Government has begun a detailed, direct consultation with the health sector and communities around the nation that will continue through to the end of the year.At the end of the year, the Government will convene a special COAG meeting with the States and Territories, explicitly on health and hospitals reform.This will be followed by a further COAG meeting in early 2010 where the Commonwealth will put to States and Territories a reform plan that they would either agree or disagree as a future direction for health and hospitals reform.Consistent with the Government's pre-election commitments, if there is no agreement to a comprehensive national reform plan, the Commonwealth will proceed to seek a mandate from the Australian people for the proper reform of our health system.Since coming to office, the Government has been confronted with the worst global economic downturn since the Depression of the 1930s.Whatever option we adopt, we will be doing so in the context of serious fiscal constraints.This will mean difficult tradeoffs.And there will be no blank cheque to the States.The implementation of any of these options will obviously have major implications for all Australians. And that is why we have begun a comprehensive process of consultation through health forums in communities across the nation  -  as we did just this morning in the northeastern Melbourne suburb of Epping.These forums have highlighted important points for future health reform. Some of these include:The critical importance of linking up health services better  -  between hospitals, GP and community care; between the Commonwealth and the States; and between different health professionals. Insights into specific areas of care - in the forum at the Flinders Medical Centre in South Australia two weeks ago, a child psychiatrist made the point that delivering more child and women's health services in primary health care centres rather than hospitals makes it easier to focus on preventative services.A manager of cancer services in a regional South Australia highlighted the need for innovative approaches to cancer care in regional areas.At Royal North Shore, a psychiatrist made the case for reduce hospital admissions by doing a better job of providing acute mental health services near community hubs.These points demonstrate that the Government has much to gain from listening to the voices of health experts, health practitioners and health consumers through health forums.The medical research community also has a vital role to play in future health reform.Australia's medical research sector is well equipped to contribute to the challenges of future health reform, as it continues contributing to international medical and scientific research efforts.Today, Australia has a total of around 18,000 health and medical researchers.From 2004 through to 2009, the NHMRC provided more than $3 billion for health and medical research  -  with 20,356 new and ongoing awards.In the 2009-10 financial year, Commonwealth funding through the NHMRC increased to a record $769 million.To put this into perspective, when the NHMRC began in 1937, the Australian Government provided an appropriation of only 30,000 Pounds  -  the equivalent of around $2 million in today's terms.And in this year's Budget, we allocated more than $430 million for translational medical research facilities and clinical training infrastructure.Cancer research forms an integral part of our $1.2 billion investment in cancer care infrastructure, the largest investment of its kind in our history.Overall, the Commonwealth's investment in medical research, through the NHRMC, directly supports around 8,000 researchers and directly or indirectly supports 88 institutes.This includes around $14 million in funding for the St Vincent's Research Institute for 2008 and 2009 from the NHMRC.The fruits of these investments can be seen in the output from our medical researchers.By global standards, medical research in Australia punches above its weight.Amongst the most commonly cited 1 per cent of research papers in the world, one in forty papers comes from Australia.That makes our contribution more than twice our population share.And it also underlines the extent to which our research sector can play a role in health reform.The National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission report spoke of the need for an ‘agile and self improving health system'.If we're to build such a system, medical research will play a critical role.We will be turning to research to play a key role in informing and driving best practice across the entire spectrum of preventative, primary and acute sectors.Firstly, we will be turning to medical research provide the evidence base for preventative care interventions.For example, medical research played a critical role in establishing the critical link between smoking and lung cancer in the 1950s.That led to extensive policy interventions by governments to lift consumer awareness of the health impacts of smoking, to create disincentives to smoking and to help smokers quit.In the decades since, the decline in tobacco use in Australia has been profound, with current adult male cigarette smoking rates down to just one-third of what they were in the late 1950s.Similarly, research conducted over the past decade has identified that a healthy lifestyle and physical and mental activity may help delay the onset of dementia.Secondly, we will be turning to medical research to translate insights into clinical practice.A recent success story is the development of the world's first cervical cancer vaccine by Professor Ian Frazer in 2006.This vaccine is now being used across the world.It will protect generations of women now and into the future from developing cervical cancer.And now we have a new frontier that is the subject of today's capital appeal  -  stem cell transplantation to replace damaged pancreatic cells, which holds the promise of preventing or curing Type I diabetes.Lastly, we will be turning to medical research to help Government make its health dollar go further  -  and reduce growth in health costs into the future.Patients need treatments, technologies, and procedures for which there is evidence from research that these are safe and effective.This is what patients expect.And it is what taxpayers also expect.Australia has mechanisms in place to make sure that this applies to the introduction and funding of new pharmaceuticals. But no similar mechanism applies to procedures and treatments already in place.As a result, procedures and treatments that lack evidence of their effectiveness, or have been shown by research to be ineffective, continue to be used.For example, the New England Journal of Medicine recently published research of an Australian team led by Rachelle Buchbinder, a NHMRC Clinical Research Fellow from Monash University. This research, funded by the NHMRC, found that a commonly available treatment for fractures of the bones of the spinal cord was in fact no better than doing nothing at all.Meanwhile, the government, insurers and the patient will have spent considerable sums on such treatments.  The NHMRC has suggested that research could be undertaken where there is a lack of evidence around currently used procedures and technologies. Primary research could be commissioned to assess treatments, therapies and devices that are currently paid for by Government, insurance companies and individuals.The NHMRC, by drawing on our world class medical research expertise and undertaking independent quality clinical trials, could demonstrate whether the procedure or technology continues to be effective.This is a concept that the Government is keen to explore in conjunction with private health insurers and our research community.The Government has already demonstrated our commitment to evidence based analysis of health expenditure through the Health Technology Assessment and the Medicare Benefits Schedule Review.We are committed to ensuring that research plays a critical role in informing the Government's health policy reforms.In launching St Vincent's fundraising appeal tonight, I especially want to thank the St Vincent's team for their excellent work.As one of the researchers here at St Vincent's, Louise Purton, remarked in the Institute's most recent annual report, medical research is a “never-ending challenge.”But it is also, as others noted in the report, also “the chance to make a difference” with work that “will aid mankind”.I notice there are some other less-recognised benefits to a life in medical research. Matthew Chung, the Structural Biology researcher at St Vincents, cites part of his motivation for working at the Institute as “getting to play with large expensive equipment”.I hope that only happens when he's under supervision.Medical research isn't always seen as the most prestigious side of medicine.But the progress achieved at St Vincent's and other institutes of medical research makes a difference in the lives of thousands of Australians every day.And that's why the contributions that are made tonight can help make such a positive difference to the work of the St Vincent's Institute for Medical Research and to health outcomes for all Australians. 


Thank you, Phil, for that remarkable innovation in Australian political etiquette. I've never been at a function yet where they've suspended table cuisine for an address by any politician, Government or opposition. Ladies and gentlemen, could you please put your hands together again for the Qantas Australian Boys Choir.
And I begin by acknowledging the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
I also acknowledge Premier John Brumby, former Prime Minister Bob Hawke, Deputy Prime Minister Julia Gillard, my ministerial colleagues too many to name - in fact, why aren't you all at work this evening?  -  parliamentary colleagues, both federal and state, friends of America, friends of Australia, friends and supporters one and all of this great alliance between our two great democracies.
Thank you, Premier John Brumby, for agreeing to host this important national dialogue. For the benefit of our American friends, Melbourne was in fact the capital of Australia between 1901 and 1927, and from the point of view of our Victorian friends, nothing should have changed. In fact, from the point of view of our Victorian friends, nothing has changed.
This is a truly extraordinarily and remarkably Australian of cities, rich in its architecture, rich in its cultural and intellectual life, rich in its culture of innovation and enterprise, and a city which can turn out 100,000 people at the MCG to watch two flies race up a wall - and even more for other, more-elevated sporting events.
I understand that our American friends last night were treated to a game of AFL at the MCG between Hawthorn and Adelaide. I was a told a story that after the game last night, former Prime Minister Bob Hawke, Hawkey to Australians, was waiting with others for the bus to take him back to the hotel with other members of the Dialogue. The bus was late. A car went by.  A bunch of young people rolled down the window and said ‘Bob Hawke, Hawkey, you are a legend', to which Hawkey replied, ‘yes, I know that, and will you give me a lift back to the hotel?'
In the remarkable culture that is Australia, that's exactly what happened, and Hawkey got back to the hotel first. Bob, we love you for who you are, and the attributes of Australian culture you continue to demonstrate.
Hawkey would also in large measure see himself as a product of this great city.
My own connection, of course, is that I'm married to a woman who lived and was educated here in Melbourne, and who mysteriously still insists that it was she, uniquely, who brought culture to our marital union.
As a loyal son of Queensland, I take exception to that  -  albeit ineffectively.
Can I also acknowledge Phil Scanlan  -  the Great Helmsman of our dialogue these last 17 years. Thank you, Phil, for your leadership for all these years. Thank you for your continued leadership as Australia's Consul General in New York, where the Scanlan School of effective Australian diplomacy is about to be metered out to the unsuspecting burghers of New York.
Can I also acknowledge Australia's Ambassador to the United States, Dennis Richardson. Dennis was appointed by my predecessor and has served both governments and the relationship between both our countries with the highest degree of professionalism, and I would like to congratulate Dennis publicly on his appointment, announced two days ago, as Secretary of the Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade - just as I congratulate Michael L'Estrange for his nearly five years at the helm of the Australian foreign service, also having served governments of both political persuasions with loyalty and with distinction.
Now, Dennis finds himself as Australia's most senior diplomat, though having known Dennis for almost the last 30 years, there are those who doubt that the words Dennis and diplomacy belong in the same sentence.
I disagree, and disagree fundamentally. It's just that Dennis's diplomacy has always belonged to that fully robust and fully Australian tradition of diplomacy.
Dennis, in fact, as some of you may know this already, was my first boss in government. He was a branch head, I was a new recruit to the then Australian Foreign Service. He taught me way back then the essential skills of the Australian Prime Ministership:
     * First, know how to photocopy
     * Second, know how to collate. It comes in handy for policy coordination
     * And third, the most important principle of all, always do what Dennis tells you to do.
Dennis, nothing has changed.
Could I also acknowledge again all those gathered here tonight to honour the ties that bind our two great democracies - our friends from America, who have come again to honour this relationship, and friends also of our alliance all these years.
To our American friends, could I say this - you know you are welcome guests in Australia. It's now close to 20 years since we first met in Georgetown, and as I remarked to Bruce Reed earlier today, none of us have changed one bit since.
This Dialogue has become an important informal network of ideas and of individuals who have helped to build the broader fabric of our relationship, and for Therese and I, to our American friends tonight we would simply say this  -  you have become part of our wider family, and tonight at the first Dialogue that I have attended as Prime Minister of Australia, together with Therese, I would like to thank you personally for the friendship you have shown us over so many, many years.
There is one who is not with us tonight, a person so instrumental in our beginnings, a person so fundamental in our continuity, a person so full of unbridled optimism about our future - and I speak, of course, of Anne Wexler.
I speak for all of us in honour of Anne. Not for her politics, for we all know her to have been the proudest of Democrats, but for Anne the person, Anne the human being, Anne the proudest of Americans.
When I was last in Washington in March, we honoured Anne at the Australian Ambassador's residence with a presentation on behalf of all her Australian friends.
When I rang her a week or so before she died, she was full of reflection but equally full of the future.
She recalled sitting between Kim Beazley and I at the first Dialogue Dinner, held in Georgetown in 1993 as we  -  that's Kim and I - proceeded to have a characteristically robust Australian exchange, I think on the rise of China.
Ever the diplomat, Anne said to me, this week or so before she died, she couldn't recall who prevailed in that particular discussion.
But what she did recall was that she figured these Aussies could be a feisty lot  -  and aided with a little bit of vino veritas  -  also a helluva lot of fun.
And so began her nearly 20-year love affair with Australia.
Her last words to me were about the future.
‘Kevin, what are we going to do about healthcare?
‘Kevin, how will we get it through the Congress?
‘How can we get proper healthcare for all Americans?'
With only a few days to live, this, for me, was vintage Anne.
Last Tuesday, as Phil has just mentioned, I spoke in her honour in the Australian Parliament, as did the Leader of the Opposition.
She has left a mark on us all.
And to honour her for the future, I am pleased to announce tonight that the Australian Government will henceforth fund the Anne Wexler Scholarship Program.
These scholarships will begin next year. They will be postgraduate scholarships. They will be small in number. They will be high in prestige. They will be available to Australians and Americans undertaking studies in each other's countries. They will be more generous than the Fulbright.
They will embrace the breadth of the common interest and common values that will bind our two democracies for the century ahead.
And I'm pleased to have announced this without any reference to my own bureaucracy, so my apologies to public servants here present, but before making any further announcement on the details, we will finalise all details with her lifelong partner Joe.
So Phil, when we the Dialogue next meets in DC, could I boldly suggest that we have our first address from our first Anne Wexler scholars.
Anne Wexler, Honorary Member of the Order of Australia, your spirit will be with us for the future in the lives and the minds and the values of the next generation of Australian and American leaders.
Friends, it is customary for each generation to say that the generation of which they happen to be part is confronted with challenges of unprecedented complexity.
There can be a certain arrogance of the present, insufficiently mindful of the forces faced by those who have come before us, and insufficiently mindful of the challenges and forces that will confront our successors.
We are, when we reflect on the span of history, barely seven generations removed from the existential challenges of the American Revolution, followed barely two generations later by the existential challenge that was the Civil War.
Then the killing fields of Flanders, where our two great nations discovered the unspeakable, the unspeakable horrors of global war.
Then the near equal horror of global recession. The rise and the fall of fascism. The unspeakable obscenity that was the holocaust. A generation of Cold War. The collapse of global communism.
And so to our present age with the rise of global terrorism, the rise of China, the rise of India, the emerging economies as new forces in global politics, security and the global economy, and now the potentially existential threats of climate change, energy security, food security and water - matters which have been deliberated upon during the dialogue both today and yesterday - compounded by the rapid global spread of communicable infectious diseases.
In fact, as the planet has shrunk, it seems our problems have expanded  -  or at least compounded. Or, put another way, as the world has globalised, so too have our challenges globalised, and so too has the scope of the solutions become globalised as well.
But my central message tonight is that as vital democracies and as vital economies we should be daunted by none of this  -  by none of this.
While the challenges are great, they are not beyond our collective wisdom, nor are they beyond our common resolve to act, to act decisively and to act effectively for the future.
Just as those who came before us, so too can our generation prevail against the fresh challenges that history and circumstances have thrown at us.
The challenges may be different, but the choices, in essential respects, are constant:
     * Choices between war and peace;
     * Choices between cooperation and conflict;
     * Choices between transparency versus secrecy;
     * And yes, choices ultimately between the strength of democracies and those who would seek to bring democracies down.
Of course there is discouragement, there are setbacks, there are defeats, but if we are to be clear-headed about the future, we should be equally clear-headed and clear-minded about the progress we have made, the successes we have had, and the successes we can still have if we act together: progress in our response to the global financial crisis; the possibility of progress on climate change; the possibility, too, of progress in crafting a truly Asia-Pacific century.
Let me say something about the global financial crisis.
It may be a passing strange to a number in this room how close the world came to the edge in September of 2008, barely 12 months ago. Global financial flows ground to a virtual halt. We poised ourselves at the abyss.
The response to that could have been as it was by our predecessors in the Great London Conference of the early 1930s, where in confronting the challenge which was posed then by the unfolding global depression, they failed to rise to that challenge.
The consequence? Political disagreement, blaming one of another, no coordinated action, fiscal contraction, an outbreak of trade protection, and the rest, as they say, is history.
The Depression unfolded to the tawdry tale of the 1930s  -  sustained recessionary economic performance, resulting in turn in sustained high levels of unemployment, fanning the fires of political extremism, the rise of fascism, and so too to war and its consequences.
On this occasion, the world has chosen a different course  -  informed by history, informed in part by the deliberations on the Great Depression by John Maynard Keynes, informed also by US global leadership.
What did we do differently this time? We, as countries of the world decided to coordinate our response through monetary policy to provide that necessary stimulus across the world to bring real economic activity back from the brink.
We decided as the countries and communities of the world to convene the G20, the 20 largest economies in the world, to act with coordinated action on fiscal policy to bring life to the real economy.
We decided also to act together, to begin to engineer a reform, fundamentally, of the rules of the financial system, work which has now been devolved to the Financial Stability Board, in order to restore confidence, in time, to financial markets.
We resolved together as the countries of the world to properly resource the IMF. Why was that necessary? To ensure that our international, our global financial policeman would have the resources at its disposal to act, and act decisively, should we see a further round of implosions in toxic assets in banks in Europe, most particularly in central and Eastern Europe.
And finally, as the countries and the economies of the world, we resolve that there should be no outbreak of global trade protectionism, learning, fundamentally, from the lessons of the early 1930s.
The good news is that the Washington Summit, convened by former President Bush, commissioned this work. Though much criticised at the time, it led, less than six months later, to the London Summit, under a different US President, President Obama, a London Summit which executed the work commissioned for it by the Washington Summit.
For those present in this room, and particularly those of you from Australia and elsewhere from the business community, the impact of the London Summit in early April of this year on global confidence and the trajectory towards global recovery has been fundamental. Do not take my word for it. Do not take the word of politicians from across the world. Study the technical deliberations of the International Monetary Fund themselves as they reflected on the core events of March and April this year when, still, the world teetered at the edge.
What happened in the time since April, since the global economies convened in London, was that confidence, both business and consumer has begun to recover, that because of a decision by governments, collectively, across the developed and developing economies, to inject $5 trillion plus into the real economy through fiscal stimulus, on top of the measures that we commissioned for reform of the financial system, we began to see the slow, slow recovery of our world economy.
This was a signal achievement, in vast contrast to that which occurred in the 1930s, and it was made possible on the back of US global economic leadership. That should be a fundamental message for us all.
Leadership displayed under the previous Republican administration, leadership executed under its succeeding Democrat administration, leadership demonstrated in both cases by the United States of America.
The challenge, of course, is by no means past us. We face challenges still. We are not out of the woods yet. There is a long way to go, and the challenges which lie before us at the upcoming Pittsburgh Summit of the G20 next month are equally formidable, and they are broadly threefold:
     * To ensure implementation of that which we agreed to execute in London;
     * To ensure, further, that we have a mechanism available to us in time, and at the appropriate time, to exit the extraordinary interventions that we have engaged in, both fiscal and monetary, as well as the provision of bank guarantees, in a coordinated fashion which enables the recovery to be sustained and not interrupted; and
     * Furthermore, and most importantly for the long term, to begin among the comity of nations to develop and to agree a new global strategy for economic growth. This is critical.
The global ‘growth gap' is a consequence of the wealth destruction which has occurred as a consequence of the global financial crisis. By some estimates, US households and their wealth fell by some $12 trillion over the last two years as a consequence of the falls in the housing and stock markets.
As household wealth has fallen, consumers have naturally responded by increasing their domestic savings rates, and we are already seeing US savings rates on the rise, reaching as high as nine per cent this year after falling below zero in 2007.
The slowdown in US consumer demand alone could leave a $500 billion hole in the US economy.
This ‘growth gap' amounts to nearly 4 per cent of US GDP, and in other countries, similar wealth destruction is having a similar effect. To fill this ‘growth gap' for the future, we must begin to build the foundations of a new growth strategy for the global economy for the future, to place our global economy in the future on a more stable footing, not simply contingent on the boom and bust cycles of the past, not simply contingent on US consumption driven by US debt, consumer and corporate, funded by capital transfers out of North-East Asia and the Middle East.
This is likely to prove to be an unsustainable model for the future, and thus we, as the community of nations must begin to develop an alternative strategy for the future, and that will and must be part of our deliberations in Pittsburgh next month.
The government of Germany under Angela Merkel has already advanced what she describes as a new Global Economic Charter for the future. The rest of us must continue to work with that framework and involve, in fact, a new strategy for the future, one which is capable of producing sustainable economic growth for the long term.
For Australia, we've been embarked on a similar program at home. Our fiscal strategy in response to the global economic crisis has been vigorous. We've also acted, through the Reserve Bank, on monetary policy. We've also, through our interventions in providing guarantees to our banks for their deposits and for their interbank lending, arrived at a situation where of the 11 remaining AA+ rated banks in the world, 4 of those 11 are Australia.
We arrive, therefore, as a consequence of these collective measures, at a position today whereby Australia;
     * among the OECD economies, is the fastest-growing economy in the world,
     * that among the major advanced economies we have the second-lowest unemployment in the world;
     * that we have the lowest net debt and the lowest deficit among the major advanced economies in the world, and
     * beyond that, we are the only advanced economy not to have so far gone into technical recession.
But we are not out of the woods yet, nor is the global economy. Nationally, we will have to prosecute, consistent with our colleagues around the world, an exit strategy from the extraordinary interventions that we've undertaken, and we'll have to develop here, as I've outlined recently in my comments publically, a sustainable, long-term economic development strategy, parallel to that which we must develop globally as well.
But in all these things, national action alone will not count. Global action is that which will count, and the leadership of the Obama administration will be critical in Pittsburgh and beyond.
The spirit that I saw alive in London is a spirit which must characterise our future as well. Sitting around the table with heads of government from the G20 countries, President Obama sitting there, President Hu Jintao across the table from him, together with the President of France, the Prime Minister of Britain, and others, as everyone spoke to a common purpose, which transcended whatever divisions may exist between us politically or in other areas  -  how do we bring the global economy back from the brink, how do we implement a global strategy in order to ensure that our people are not thrown into the mass unemployment that so plagued our planet in the 1930s.
It is that spirit which I saw alive in the dining room at Number 10 in April this year, which must continue to characterise our global deliberations for the future.
I said before that we must be mindful of our successes and the challenges for possible future success as well. I've spoken of the global financial crisis, the global economic recession, and the challenges which lie ahead and what we've achieved so far. So too do those challenges present themselves to us in climate change.
For climate change, Copenhagen looms close.
L'Aquila, the conference of the major economies forum and the G8 achieved some success, some success in defining a two degrees Centigrade limit at beyond which global temperatures should not rise. But the challenges between Pittsburgh and Copenhagen are real, challenges which go to how do we in fact ensure that developed countries rise to the challenge of having verifiable targets, midterm and long term, that developing countries and emerging economies also share their burden for the future by having verifiable actions through to 2020 and 2050, and that we can develop among us agreed international financing mechanisms to underpin the challenges which emerging economies face in order to bring about fundamental transformations in their energy postures for the future.
The G20 again looms as the vehicle, through Pittsburgh, to give credence, to give coherence, and to give the possibility of outcome at Copenhagen and beyond, and that is a challenge which lies with us for the future.
I conclude on a challenge closer to home, here in our own region, the Asia-Pacific region.
Our world needs, at the continuation and the enhancement, of a global rules-based order, so too does our region, the Asia Pacific region.
Here in our region we've had some success over the years. The Association of South-East Asian Nations has formed an entity called ASEAN, which has turned former combatants into partners. If we reflect back as to where the South-East Asian nations lay 40 years ago as to where they are today, it is a testimony to the effectiveness of that act in regionalism to bring together people into a common purpose for the future.
For our wider region, the Asia-Pacific region, the challenge is parallel  -  how do we craft a future among ourselves which is both peaceful and prosperous. APEC has brought together the economies of our region. The East Asian Summit has brought together many of the polities of our region, but regrettably to date excluding the United States.
Our region is still plagued by unresolved and significant territorial disputes, whether it's in the Taiwan Straits, on the Korean Peninsula, in the South China Sea, or in Kashmir.
The challenge for the future is how do we form among us with creativity and with an entrepreneurial spirit, a new Asia-Pacific Community which is capable of bringing about a common sense of security and political purpose for this, the Pacific Century, in the century as it unfolds.
On questions of security, to inculcate a culture of transparency rather than secrecy. How do we fashion and build confidence and security building measures, beginning with such modest areas as common responses to national disasters in our region, whereby our armed forces and our emergency services work together and in an instant to respond to this, one of the most natural disaster prone regions in the world.
These are the challenges which lie ahead. These are the challenges to which we can rise.
I believe, friends, that we can rise to all of these challenges, if our political resolve and our political will is up to it. All of these, in critical respects, will depend on the continuation of US global and regional leadership. It is leadership which we, in this country, Australia, are proud to support, and we intend to be your partners for the future.
We should therefore among us have absolute confidence that we can have the collective resolve, the collective political will, and the collective political imagination to rise to each of the challenges I've referred to this evening.
We can do so.
There is one thing that can defeat us, and that is to allow our domestic political divides to so swamp our ability to see the greater global challenges which lie ahead of us.
I believe also we can rise beyond that challenge as well.
That's where the bipartisan and the truly international nature of this Dialogue embodies the spirit our region and the spirit of the world that we will need to draw upon to deal with these great challenges of the future.
I salute this dialogue. I salute each and every one of you who have been participants in it, as we must harness again the great energies and vitalities of our democracies and our economies to deal with these great challenges of our common future.
I thank you. 


Today we gather to recognise courage.
Today we gather to recognise sacrifice.
Today we gather to recognise mateship.
We honour the service of all 60,000 Australians who served in the Vietnam War.
We remember the sacrifice of the 521 Australians who lost their lives in this conflict.
We remember, too, those who were wounded in battle.
And we remember those who today still bear the scars of war.
When you talk to these veterans about what they did for their country, most of them in my experience, shrug their shoulders and say simply: “I was just doing my job.”
Today, I would say to each and every one of them, and each and every one of you gathered here today, that the Australian Government and the Australian people thank you for a job well done.
Today we also remember Private David Fisher, whose remains were brought home from the dense jungle of Vietnam last September.
And we remember Flying Officer Michael Herbert and Pilot Officer Robert Carver, the final two Australians missing in action in Vietnam.
It is right that as a people we never give up in the search for those we have lost in battle fields abroad.
For they and their earthly remains are a part of us. They are part of our soil - the soil from which they have sprung, the soil from which we have sprung, the soil that is Australia.
And their spirit remains with us still and will be so forever more.
A spirit which speaks to us down the ages and down this great avenue of heroes - an avenue which honours our heroes from the trenches of ANZAC, an avenue which honours those who still fight in the mountain passes of Afghanistan.
A spirit which says to us today a simple thing, but a profound thing - that service and sacrifice for others are the heart and soul of any nation that lays claim to greatness.
Thank you to the dedicated and selfless work of so many Australians in having our last Australians missing in action returned home. It is because of their work that we are able to complete this unfinished work of the nation, and I thank you most sincerely.
With their homecoming later this month, there will no doubt be much sadness, mingled with some measure of comfort for those who have waited so very long for their return.
We thank the families of all veterans for their bravery and compassion in supporting their loved ones down the years, because much support was needed for those who made it home.
For too long, their fears that their health problems connected to their service in Vietnam were ignored or flatly denied. These were their fears, and fears which continue still today.
Last year, the Australian Government launched the Vietnam Veterans' Family Study.
This $11.5 million study aims to help identify health problems that may have occurred as a result of service in Vietnam, along with protective factors and characteristics that help build resilience on the part of the families of veterans as well.
We asked Vietnam veterans, other servicemen and women, their children, their step-children, nieces and nephews, partners and ex-partners to take part.
I am pleased to be able to confirm today that we have now attained the minimum required numbers of volunteers to ensure that the key parts of this broad survey, this broad study, can now proceed.
This has been long and arduous work, and I thank all of our friends and partners in the Vietnam veterans' community for assisting us in it.
This family study, this family survey, will allow the scientific evaluation of the impacts on the children and other family members of your service in Vietnam.
This is the right thing to do for Australia, because you the soldiers of Australia, were sent abroad in all our names - sent abroad in all our names
Our single, our great, and our important purpose today is to honour you, to honour those who did not return, and to honour those who continue today to bear the scars of war in Australia's name.


Thanks very much, Don, and thank you for that wholehearted acceptance of the principle of compulsory arbitration.
And Julia, where are you? Note it down, we'll get it to the files down at the ACTU headquarters by about nine this evening and everything will be on.
The thing about the job that I have, is that, and I'm sure you've had this experience as well, is that you sometimes find it hard to call people, and I'm sure this won't come as a big shock, but I don't often or always get around to calling people back when I know that I should.
Heather is one of those people whose call you always return. You would not dare not to.
What's sort of frustrating about that fact, though, is that Heather is so busy, often she doesn't return my call.
I'm not smiling, Heather.
But to be fair, it's mainly my fault. If you looked at the number of jobs we've given Heather in recent times, we just keep appointing her to things. She's a member of the Business Advisory Group, she's on Skills Australia, she took part in the 2020 Summit, she's working on the Henry Review of Taxation, a few things on industrial relations as well, I think.
By the way Heather, who's paying for all this? Is it -
Can I say your contribution is exceptionally welcome.
I was going to appoint Heather to some other bodies recently, but she said she really valued that 15 minutes she still had time to check her emails, and I said to her, “Heather, based on recent experience here, it's always very important to check your emails”.
I am delighted to be here tonight at the Australian Industry Group dinner, and to be part of your National Forum.
Heather has mentioned to me that tonight is a special evening, celebrating the addition of the South Australian members, the Engineering Employers Association of South Australia  -  and we welcome you warmly.
What brings the members of the AiGroup together is a shared commitment to our country's prosperity, to building businesses, expanding industries, generating jobs and laying the foundations for future growth.
That is why the Australian Government enjoys such a strong partnership with the AiGroup, and I want to acknowledge tonight the ongoing contribution the Group makes to the Government's reform agenda.
Through the outstanding leadership of Heather Ridout, the AiGroup has contributed to our reform agenda for national infrastructure, skills development, industrial relations, business deregulation, climate change and taxation, and don't worry, she's not to blame for all the outcomes, but she has been actively engaged with us on all of those.
In corridors of the Ministerial Wing, the carpets are worn down with the constant flow of AiGroup members in and out of ministerial offices, advocating for the interests of Australian businesses  -  and that is as it should be.
In the past 12 months the AiGroup has played an important role across many complex policy initiatives, including:
     * Australia's response to the global recession, which has involved the largest Commonwealth infrastructure program in our nation's history;
     * The design of the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme;
     * The drafting and implementation of the Fair Work Act and the reforms to the Building and Construction Industry Improvement Act;
     * The harmonisation of national occupational health and safety laws, where your support will be crucial in encouraging all Australian jurisdictions  -  all Australian jurisdictions - to implement the model OHS Act and regulations by 2011;
     * The revival of our manufacturing industry so that we can still be a country that makes things in the future  -  a passion of Kim Carr, a passion of mine;
     * The strengthening of the national innovation system, including the re-casting of the Research and Development tax incentive;
     * The investment allowance for smaller businesses, and
     * The additional funding for the Export Market Development Grants program.
Of course sometimes the AiGroup and the Government agree and sometimes we do not, and that is one of the great things about our democracy, but we enjoy a strong, constructive and positive relationship, and one that is to the benefit of our nation and I believe to the benefit of good policy outcomes for us all.
In my remarks tonight I'd like to provide something of a report card on our response to the global economic crisis in the short term and to begin to outline our strategy for sustainable economic reform for the long term. But first I want to touch briefly on the critical policy challenge of the moment - climate change. Because whether we like it or not, this is as fundamental a challenge to our economy for the future as it is also for the environment.
We need concerted action. We need action domestically, internationally, we need action locally, we need action globally, to meet this challenge effectively.
With only a short time to go before Copenhagen, the Australian Government is working hard, through Penny Wong, to ensure that the world takes this window of opportunity in order to act on climate change.
Unfortunately, last Thursday in the Senate, our emissions trading laws were voted down. The result of that decision of the Senate is renewed uncertainty at a time when businesses need to be able to move forward with confidence and certainty for future.
I cannot emphasise strongly enough the importance of the CPRS legislation proceeding, and I acknowledge the AiGroup's support for passing the legislation this year for business certainty.
I know there is concern about the challenges involved in the implementation of the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme, but can I say, across the world this is a challenge confronting all developed economies, and none of it is easy. It's all hard because of the fundamental nature of the reform in which we are engaged.
This is a historic economic policy reform that will play a central role in engineering Australia's transition to a lower-carbon economy in the future. It will require change and adjustments in many parts of our economy, but it will also create many opportunities, some of which we have not dreamed of yet, especially for our manufacturing industries that will provide the green products, and also our other industries that will provide the green services of the future  -  more fuel efficient cars, the water and energy-saving devices and technologies for our homes and for our offices.
I spoke yesterday in Sydney with Larry Smar, who I understand was with you here today, as he explained to me over lunch in Sydney the absolute importance of what we're doing with the national broadband network and its impact in terms of energy saving, energy efficiency and a whole series of initiatives which will contribute fundamentally to our ability to bring greenhouse gas emissions down. One part, I believe, of an exciting set of innovations for the future, and business opportunities coming off the back of the national high-speed broadband network, which again we have not yet fully conceived of.
It is essential that Australia begins this transition to a lower-carbon economy if we are to compete successfully for all the business opportunities that will be generated by the global transition to low-carbon energy sources in the years ahead.
It's time we got on with the implementation of this scheme  and with working with Australian business so they can be fully prepared for implementation come 2011, because if we somehow as a nation conclude that this all too hard for us, all too difficult, and that somehow we could remain outside the global network of cap-and-trade systems across the developed economies of the world, let me say this  -  we'll be denying Australia of a whole new set of economic opportunities for the future.
Secondly, we'll be also inviting the possibility of punitive tariffs being imposed on this economy being imposed on this economy in the future by other economies which  join the cap-and-trade system of the future. 
Thirdly, we will have done nothing, absolutely nothing, to have contributed to a positive global outcome at Copenhagen - critical for Australia hottest and driest continent, where the impact of climate change is being felt first and hardest.
Therefore, the challenge for us all, whatever our side of politics, is to lift our vision beyond the partisan divide and to seize this opportunity for Australia, not see it simply as a threat, but to see it as an opportunity, and to embark upon this bold new set of reforms for the future.
Previous generations of Australian leaders have confronted challenges of complexity as well. They have, by and large, risen to the occasion. That is our challenge for the future.
Our most pressing challenge right now  -  -  to echo the Forum theme  -  is negotiating the downturn to emerge stronger than before.
Our most pressing challenge right now is to ensure that our strategy for economic reform continues for the future, and that we can continue to negotiate our strategy for recovery from the global economic recession.
Australia has a remarkably powerful story to tell, right now, in terms of how we have so far withstood all that the world thrown at us through the global financial crisis and the global economic recession.
We have suffered damage, that is true, but compared with most other economies, we've weathered this storm arguably the best of many.
But as we continue through the powerful headwinds of the months ahead, we will also face new challenges, so tonight I'd like to run through two or three things which I think are important to underline as we embark upon the challenges of the second half of this year and into 2010:
     * Firstly, our Nation Building for Recovery plan;
     * Secondly the impact of what we have achieved so far,
     * Third, the uneven, the very uneven road of recovery that lies ahead, where unemployment will continue to rise, where interest rates, as the Reserve Bank Governor has indicated already, and I have in earlier speeches as well, will also rise, and on top of that the fact that we'll also, on the back of commodity price improvements around the world, also see increases in the cost of living. These are the challenges of what I describe as an uneven recovery;
     * And the fourth thing I'd like to touch on tonight is, most importantly, how do we lay the foundation stones for long-term, sustainable economic growth in Australia, the building blocks for a long-term productivity revolution of the Australian economy.
You have heard us say before that this global recession is the worst in 75 years. I would simply draw your attention to what is seen on the screen before you.
Many of you in this room, in fact most of you, have an active memory of the recession in 1991, an active memory in some cases of the recession of 1982. With those two earlier recessions, remember well this point: that the growth numbers in 1982 were still, for global growth, 0.9, and for 1991 they were 1.5, positive. However, for 2009, the global growth number is projected to be negative 1.4.
Whatever the experiences were, therefore, of '82 and '91, remember that the global economy continued to grow. This, remarkably, since when economic data has been collected in the post-war period, since '51, is the first time that the global economy is projected to shrink.
Notwithstanding the above, partly because of the measures undertaken by the Australian Government, partly because of where we are in terms of our international trade and our access, still, to export markets in this part of the world, and partly because of the decisions taken by so many of you in this room, our performance against the other OECD economies has been strong. Australia, as of the conclusion of the first quarter this year, is the fastest growing economy in the OECD. This should be something in which we take some pride as a nation.
The measures that we took as a government to underpin this performance are broadly in three categories. The first of them, on the slide before your at the moment, goes to the use of Government guarantees for the banking system. For those of you familiar with your discussions with your banks in October last year, you'll recall how difficult things became.
You'll recall that we had a virtual drying up of global credit flows. You'll recall that people were becoming anxious about the security of their deposits.
That's why in October last year, the Government, meeting in Cabinet in this building here, took two fundamental decisions. One, for the first time in Australia's history, to guarantee everyone's savings deposits, deposits in their building societies and credit union, and second, again the first time in this country's history, to guarantee the inter-bank lending of Australia's banks, both at home and abroad.
The reason that was necessary, if you look at the slide, and look at what was happening in September, October, November of last year, the total raisings by Australian banks, both onshore and offshore ground to zero. What you see in the right hand side of the graph is in fact the emergence of the impact of the guarantees provided by the Australian Government. That shaded in grey, obviously, offshore raisings, which are guaranteed by the Australian Government, that in black domestic raisings guaranteed by the Australian Government.
It is only as we've got closer to the middle of this year, 2009, in May and in June, did we begin to see the rising again of those raisings by some of our banks not using the Australian Government guarantee.
Why do I labour this point? Credit - the artery of the economy. The non-availability of credit, the time span is short between when the tap is turned off and when the real economy begins to fundamentally fall in a heap.
The decisions taken by this Government in this building in October last year were fundamental to ensuring that the lines of credit opened up again by year's end and early 2009, and you begin to see here the slow trajectory towards recovery.
The second part of our response to this global recession has been what we would do in terms of providing stimulus to the Australian economy.
When we sat in the Cabinet room on that room, and the Treasurer's with us tonight, as is the Finance Minister, and the Deputy Prime Minister, and it was a long and hard series of meetings, we asked the Secretary of the Treasury, who's also with us tonight, to explain to us what had happened in previous recessions, and how we could actually make a material difference.
We began with a presentation in terms of something basic and elementary, which is what were the final drivers of total final demand in the Australian economy  -  household consumption, dwelling construction, private business investment, public final demand, and you'll see their relative statistical significance in the middle column  -  54, 6, 17 and 22.
Net exports, of course, adding up at the end, and contributing to the overall equation.
Therefore, this led to a very clear set of conclusions  -  if you're looking at this, beginning of October last year, what could you do there and then to make a material difference there and then in the weeks following the Lehman's implosion as the global economy was teetering on the edge, to make a material difference in the real economy?
And the answers we came up with were: cash stimulus. Ken's advice to us: go hard, go households, go early.
Secondly, dwelling construction, hence the trebling of the First Home Owners' boost, and thirdly, private business investment, hence the temporary investment allowance which we've employed as well.
Australia's strong economic position is in large part due to strong, decisive Government action to cushion the impact of the recession. 
Those were the three measures that we embraced at around about that time in order to provide an injection then into the real economy. Had we waited for the simple delivery of infrastructure, medium-term or longer-term infrastructure, as many economies around the world have done, the flow-through time would indeed have been long, we would have seen a complete collapse in real activity and real employment in the economy in the last quarter last year, the first quarter this year and the second quarter this year, and once you've got employment falling through the floor, as has happened in so many economies around the world, the roll-on consequences for asset prices, and then to the financial system, particularly off the back of real estate, becomes a negative cycle, and in turn compounding the spiralling down of growth.
In our stimulus strategy, we phased it in three stages. What you see before you, of course, is short, medium and long.
The short-term measures are those I've just run through  -  cash payments to families, and secondly the trebling of the First Home Owners boost and thirdly, the provisions we've made by way of support for the temporary investment allowance, all adding up to some $26.9 billion.
That has made, collectively, the critical difference. Final quarter last year, first quarter this year, and we see, still, with the effect it has in second quarter this year as the numbers have not been produced.
However, the second phase, medium term, which is this large school build, this large public housing build and this large range of energy efficiency measures, as well investment in local government infrastructure, to collectively representing some $34.9 billion. Of course, the flagship for this is the largest school building program that you've seen anywhere in the country, spread across all 10,000 of Australia's schools, primary and secondary, Government and non-government. That is underway now, and the objective again is for it to fold in at the time at which the shorter-term measures, particularly the cash payments, were fading out. That is the phase which we are currently in, and have been in since around about June.
And then the third phase, of course, is long term, and there you would have seen that outlined in great detail in the Treasurer's budget speech, in terms of our investment in long-term transport projects, the National Broadband Network, as well as a range of other education research projects, clean energy, health and hospitals infrastructure.
Three stages to the overall stimulus strategy, critical, fundamentally critical, to provide a rolling series of stimulus into the economy in order to cushion us in the real economy from the full impact of what was happening abroad.
Some have questioned the real impact in terms of cash payments. I simply draw that to you attention as a fundamental difference between what happened here and other economies, such as in Europe, Canada, Japan, the US and New Zealand, in terms of the retail sector.
1.5 million Australians work in retail. That's 15% of our workforce. It's a lot of Australians. Ensuring that we could generate growth numbers like that at a time when around the rest of the world it was falling through the floor, was of critical importance.
Of course, loans to first home buyers based on the First Home Owners boost had a similar effect in terms of what we saw in the overall number of loans, and again the housing data, while still down, has been better than in most other comparable economies.
Business investment, remarkably, has remained just positive  -  one of the contributing factors in this data has been in fact the temporary investment allowance. As you know, 30 percent announced at the end of last year, and then from the middle of this year up to 50 percent for small businesses through until year's end, again with the idea of providing businesses with encouragement to bring forward their capital investments, and most critically, to continue to contribute to positive growth.
These short-term measures have worked to support the economy until our infrastructure investment has come online. As the chart shows, without the cash stimulus, growth would have been -0.2 in the March quarter, pushing Australia into a technical recession.
The simple fact is that without the Australian Government's early and decisive action, through targeted stimulus, Australia would already be in recession.
Treasury's advice is clear: Without the cash stimulus to low income earners, Australia would have experienced a second consecutive negative quarter in March  -  pushing Australian into technical recession.
Therefore, we thought this was the wrong way to go.
We did not accept the advice of our political opponents. We thought this was the right way to go in terms of ensuring we could at least cushion Australia from the impact of the global economic recession.
A technical recession would have had a further negative impact on economic confidence, both business and for consumers. Therefore, we believed the right thing to do was to support growth, to support employment, and to avoid a crushing blow to confidence. That's why we believe we've embarked upon the right strategy.
Just as no stimulus would have plunged Australia into recession earlier this year, reducing the stimulus now would pull the rug out from under thousands of small- and medium- sized Australian businesses dependent on stimulus-related work to keep their heads above water. We are not out of the woods yet.
It's important to emphasise that 70 per cent of our total stimulus investment is in medium- and long-term infrastructure. 
As I said before, the Education Revolution, energy efficiency and social housing, the longer-term infrastructure investments as well  -  the uniting theme with so many of these infrastructure investments is also to have a weather-eye on our strategy to build long-term productivity growth.
Mention was made before of the deficit, historically, in infrastructure investment in Australia. For the first time, the Commonwealth's now taking a lead in national infrastructure planning through the good work and the strong leadership of the Minister for Infrastructure, Anthony Albanese, but we have just begun this process.
The consequence of all these measures has flowed through to confidence.
The consumer confidence numbers have rallied, as you can see on the screen, just as have the business confidence figures rallied as well, and therefore they have returned almost  -  almost  -  to pre-crisis levels.
As you know, what we do objectively in the economy by way of policy and programs and investment is critical. What the economy itself concludes subjectively, both as consumers and as business leaders, is equally critical. What the Australian community, I believe, concluded, having seen the strategy that we're putting in place, was that in fact this strategy was of substance and formed a basis upon which they could have confidence in making business and consumer decisions for the future.
That has been as important as have been the real decisions in the real economy by business leaders such as yourself.
Without the stimulus, unemployment would be higher. Without stimulus, Treasury estimates that unemployment would have reached some 10 per cent. As you know, we are tracking somewhat under that, and we believe this is a direct consequence of the stimulus investments that we have made.
Treasury's advice to us was that in the two years of this year and next year, had we not invested in this stimulus, there would be something in excess of 200,000 Australians each of those two years who would be further out of work.
Australia's unemployment rate is lower than the other major advanced economies, only second lowest compared against Japan. Again, the impact of our measures on the labour market have been significant.
One final measure in which we've engaged in is this  -  I mentioned before our activity to stabilise financial markets, I've mentioned our investment in stimulus, short, medium and long  -  but the other thing we've sought to invest in, of course, is the work undertaken by the Deputy Prime Minister in her responsibility for education and training, assisted by the Employment Minister, Mark Arbib, and that is a jobs and 
training compact supporting those who have lost their jobs.
A Compact with Young Australians, a $277 million investment, where young Australians must be earning or learning, a Compact with Retrenched Workers, some $438 million, providing immediate employment assistance, reduced waiting times for income support, as well as what we've negotiated with major banks  -  a capacity to postpone mortgage payments for 12 months - and a Compact with Local Communities. Across Australia, we know from the historical data where in fact we have seen the highest spikes of unemployment in the past, and that's where we have deployed this local jobs fund through the assistance of local priority employment coordinators to take the edge off the highest levels of unemployment in the most unemployment affected regions.
That, therefore, is our strategy, but as a consequence of implementing it, what we're able to say to the world at large is that Australia has lower debt than the major advanced economies in the world  -  that's us on the bottom left. Australia has lower deficits than the major advanced economies, and you can see, again, us on the bottom left. Those are, of course, percentages of deficit as a percentage of GDP.
The overall impact of these measures, then, before I go on to productivity growth, is as follows  -  that what we have been able to do through these measures, supported by the decisions in business, and often hard decisions to retain employees when it's been most difficult, has been to bring about a situation where in Australia as of now, we have the fastest growing economy in the OECD, the second-lowest unemployment of the major advanced economies, the lowest debt, the lowest deficit of the major advanced economies, and we have done so, so far, with this economy being the only one of the major advanced economies not to have gone into technical recession.
That is what we have been dealing with up until now. How do you build for the building blocks of future? As our president said before, the big challenge for the future lies in building productivity growth. Those are the figures to which he referred just before  -  sliding productivity growth since we began reflecting these data series from the early ‘90s. This has to be turned around, just as we need to embrace a global challenge about how we in fact close the global growth gap in the future, without simply assuming that we're going to have a return to business as usual in the years ahead.
US household wealth is estimated to have fallen by $12 trillion over the past two years due to falls in housing and stock markets, and as household wealth has fallen, consumers have naturally responded by increasing their savings rates.
US savings rates are already on the rise  -  reaching as high as 9 per cent this year after falling below zero in 2007.
The slowdown in consumer demand alone could leave a $500 billion a year hole in the US economy  -  a growth gap of some 4 per cent of GDP. To fill the growth gap we must build the foundations for future growth and put the global economy on a more stable footing.
For us simply to assume here in Australia that the formula which has generated growth in the past, led by US consumption fuelled from US debt, which has been underpinned by global capital transfers out of North-East Asia and Middle East, is not a sustainable proposition for the future.
One of the deliberations we will have on the table at the Pittsburgh summit of the G20 next month will be how do we being to craft a different global growth strategy which is sustainable for the future, and one which necessarily embraces the reconciliation of the financial imbalances between the United States and North-East Asia for the rest of the decade ahead.
That is for the world, but also for Australia it means how do we actually carve more out of global growth which may be more sluggish than it's been for decades past, for which there is only one answer  -  and that is a productivity growth agenda.
That's why we are embracing and targeting these five key areas:
     * Regulatory and competition reform through the COAG process;
     * Infrastructure investment, brought about through the leadership of the Building Australia Fund and Infrastructure Australia;
     * Investment in innovation, in particular through the national high-speed broadband network;
     * Skills investment, which have been championed by the Deputy Prime Minister in the Education Revolution; and
     * Tax reform, as we await the deliberations of the Henry Commission of review into the Australian taxation system.
To conclude on what the private economy is up to, and I mention this to you as a word of encouragement about what is going on out there in the resources sector at the moment. Today, the Australian Government, together with the Government of Western Australia, made an important decision, and that decision was to jointly accept any long-term liability resulting from the storing of CO2 in geological formations part of the Gorgon project in WA. This is an extraordinarily large project - $50 billion.
Let me put that into context. The stimulus strategy I've just run through from the Government, spread over a number of years, cumulatively represents some 6.1 percent or thereabouts of GDP. This one resource project in Western Australia is worth $50 billion, or about 5 percent of GDP. This is critical for Australia's future.
That is why ourselves and the Liberal Government in Western Australia have worked hard to conjointly take on this responsibility. The project has not been formally concluded yet. Some remaining approvals remain to be delivered, but it is one in which we should, as a country, take confidence, assuming we can get over the final regulatory hurdles, generating some 6,000 jobs alone in the construction phase.'
To conclude, what we've done so far is embrace upon, embark upon, this strategy of nation building for recovery. We've done so by investing in stimulus, by supporting financial stability through the bank guarantees we've provided, and through our strategy for jobs and training intervention as well. The results, as I've run through before, for Australia, I think, are a good story for us to tell, but we're not out of the woods yet, and the road ahead will be long and tough, but what must unite our efforts as AiG and as the Australian Government going forward, is how do we embark now upon a building decade for productivity growth for the future.
Ladies and gentlemen, that's where AiG comes in. The work we've done so far is but the beginning. We have to not just recover from this global economic recession, we have to put in place the foundation stones, the building blocks for long-term, sustainable economic growth. That's our report card so far. The real report card is whether we can engender that productivity growth for the future, and that will only come if we the Government remain in close and strong partnership with you, the leaders of Australian business.
I thank you for your time.


Thank you for the Honorary Fellowship and for that welcome.
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
As we all know, this college is named after Ernest Henry Burgmann, the Anglican Bishop of Canberra and Goulburn for almost a quarter of a century from 1934 to 1960 - “Burgie”, as he was known to most.
He had a couple of other nicknames, too.
The tabloids dubbed him Australia's “Red Bishop” in the 1930s and 40s.
Almost every newspaper in the country called him a “meddlesome beast” in 1954.
But that was only because a young wire journalist misheard the government Whip in the House when he described Burgmann as “a most meddlesome priest” during a rowdy parliamentary exchange.
Burgmann believed there was a role for Christian engagement in the political and public and intellectual debate. He was part pastor, part prophet, part political activist, 100 per cent stirrer - and a man of religion who was passionate about education, about social justice, and about politics.
Throughout the Great Depression, Burgmann was a constant burr in the side of government, prodding them to help the masses of unemployed, who had lost their jobs through global forces beyond their control and through no fault of their own. Agitating governments to supply people in rural and regional Australia with basic services like water and electricity. And urging all Australians to realise that their destiny no longer lay with the British empire but with the Asia-Pacific region of which they were part.
In the 1950s, he was named in parliament after publicly advocating a “no” vote against Menzies' referendum to outlaw the Communist Party.
His partial autobiography, “The Education of An Australian”, was in the top 10 bestsellers in 1944.
Yet it still came as a surprise to the Anglican members of the inter-church committee which founded this college when “Burgmann” easily won the vote for the name of this College.
Burgmann was a man of great passions, but education was among his greatest passions - a passion shared by the Government that I lead.
The Government recognises education's leading role in laying the foundations for long-term recovery from the global economic recession.
We are currently dealing with the worst set of global economic conditions since the Great Depression, and we have been wrestling with enormous macro-economic changes thrown up by the global financial crisis.
The good news is that Australia has so far weathered this crisis better than most countries. Of all the major advanced economies, we have had the strongest growth, lower unemployment than all but one of those economies, the lowest deficit, the lowest debt levels, and we are the only major advanced economy to avoid a technical recession.
That's because the Government took strong, early, decisive action in financial markets, in stimulus plans and in nation-building for recovery to cushion Australia from the worst of the global downturn and support Australian jobs.
Maintaining macro-economic growth against the rest of the world is one thing. Continuing to move ahead with micro-economic reform is another.
In my recent essay, I wrote about our productivity growth agenda to drive Australia's future global competitiveness. We are targeting five key priorities to lift long-term productivity growth:
     * Ending the blame game with the States and Territories  - with a process of regulatory and competition reform through the COAG process;
     * Reforming the process for development of productive national infrastructure and lifting the national investment in the infrastructure of the 21st century;
     * Investing in innovation, particularly through the national high-speed broadband network;
     * Tax reform, beginning with the most comprehensive review of the tax system in more than three decades; and
     * Investing in an education revolution, to build the most highly skilled, best trained and best educated workforce in the world.
These are all ways to drive long-term productivity growth. Education builds a more productive workforce and empowers individuals to reach their full potential. 
It begins in early childhood where the foundations for future skills are formed.
The American Nobel Prize winning economist and Professor of Economics at the University of Chicago, James Heckman, has long been an advocate of early childhood education. Heckman's research has shown that early childhood education has positive outcomes in areas ranging from crime rates and teenage pregnancy to health and salary levels.
As Heckman notes, the evaluation and cost-benefit analysis of the Perry Preschool Project in Michigan showed that low-income children who were receiving quality child care and early education services experienced substantially better life outcomes than those who did not have the benefit of early learning opportunities.
The study found that through to age 40, and this is in US dollars, there was a return of $17 for every $1 spent. That is an extraordinary return on investment, and it shows the extraordinary importance of education.
Education investment is where good economic policy meets good social policy, offering better lives and better opportunities for a generation of young kids.
As Professor Heckman recently said, investment in early education during times of economic adversity is “the best type of stimulus package”. That's because it provides both an immediate boost to jobs, and long-term benefits to the economy. And that's the thinking that has underpinned the Government's investment in the education revolution, an increased investment in education of around 50 per cent more in real terms over the current five year period compared to the previous five years.
Analysis by the Dutch economist Erik Canton suggests that an increase by one year of the average education level of the labour force would increase productivity by 7 to 10 per cent in the short term and by 11 to 15 per cent in the long term, and research by the OECD shows that if average education levels of the working-age populations were increased by just one year, the economy would be 3 to 6 per cent larger.
Education is also critically important to address the risk of social disadvantage. We know that the most vulnerable workers in an economic downturn are those who are the least skilled, who face the longest period of unemployment and the greatest difficulty in finding secure full-time work.
Creating the best-educated, best-skilled, best-trained workforce in the world is the core vision of the Australian Government's productivity agenda.  The Government's vision for the education revolution starts with early childhood education and progresses through primary to secondary.
Since the 2007 election, the Government has:
     * Doubled the investment in Australian schools to $62.1 billion;
     * Undertaken the biggest school modernisation project in Australia's history;
     * Invested almost $1 billion to enable universal pre-school for all children by 2013;
     * Committed $2 billion to guarantee a 1:1 student to computer ratio for students in Year 9 to 12 in every school in the nation;
     * Begun rolling out state-of-the-art Trades Training Centres across the country;
     * Invested $550 million to attract and keep the best and brightest teachers;
     * Responded to the Bradley Review of higher education with additional funding of $2.2 billion and uncapping the number of university places.
One of the proudest reforms of past Labor Governments is the way they have opened up educational pathways for successive generations of working people who otherwise would never have had those opportunities - from basic schools and skills training in the early 20th century, to the major training programs for soldiers returning from war in the 1940s, and of course to the Whitlam Government's decision to open up universities to all Australians, regardless of their background or income.
As a result of that decision, a generation of working class kids got the opportunity to have a university education, many of them, the first kid in the family to have that chance. Even today, I meet people who are now in charge of industries, departments and public institutions who tell me that they have got to where they are because Gough Whitlam unlocked the university gates and let them in.  And I often say to them  -  me too.
But the challenge of making university accessible to every young Australian didn't end in the 1970s. Significant challenges still exist today.
There can be no education revolution without a matching revolution in equality of educational opportunity for all Australians, whatever their background, wherever they come from. Central to the Government's education revolution is a determination to make opportunities available to all Australians.
From early childhood to schools to higher education, our reforms have focused on providing all young people, but particularly those with lesser means, with access to the opportunities high quality learning offers.
In this financial year alone, we are spending $3.6 billion on early childhood education and child care. This will support some 800,000 working families across our nation.
We have made child care more affordable for all families by increasing the Child Care Rebate from 30 to 50 per cent of parents' out-of-pocket expenses. We know this has made a huge difference to parents. 
A recent ABS survey found that child care costs have fallen by almost 20 per cent over the last year. Compare that to a 13 per cent increase in child care costs the previous year.
The education revolution includes significant funds to enable students from disadvantaged backgrounds have access to high quality education:
     * $1.1 billion to provide additional resources to our poorest schools for extra teaching support, homework classes and other learning resources;
     * $540 million to provide extra tuition to students who are struggling to meet literacy and numeracy benchmarks;
     * $2 billion to put computers on the desks of every student in years 9-12  - knowing that many young people come from families without the resources to purchase technology to support their children's learning; and
     * $2.5 billion to construct trades training centres to help those young people at risk of leaving school early to complete their education and gain a trade qualification.
We know that students from poorer families are more likely to leave school early - transferring their parents' poverty to a new generation. That is why we are determined to see school retention rates rise to 90 per cent by 2015.
Our reforms to higher education are similarly aimed at opening up our universities to the thousands of young people from low socioeconomic backgrounds.
Today just one in three Australian 25 to 34 year olds has a bachelor's qualification. Too few young people from low socioeconomic backgrounds reach university or gain a degree.
The Bradley Review found a number of groups of young Australians are significantly under-represented in higher education in Australia. Whether it is participation of Australians from remote areas, Indigenous Australians, or those from low socio-economic backgrounds, there is a constant pattern of under-representation in Australian higher education. That is why we are investing $491 million over the next four years to uncap the number of public university places from 2012, allowing universities to offer enrolment to all eligible students.
We want to open our universities to an additional 80,000 student places over the four years from 2010 to 2013, allowing about 50,000 additional students to participate in higher education. That is why we are also investing $437 million over four years to lift the enrolments of students from low income families by 55,000 by 2020. We will do this by funding our universities to build robust partnerships with disadvantaged schools and by rewarding them for attracting and retaining low SES students.
We came to office determined to provide young people who did not want to attend university with the opportunity to learn a trade.
We have delivered with 711,000 training places for school leavers, the unemployed and those in jobs who may be at risk of redundancy from technological and economic change.
Our Jobs and Training Compact also targets Australians most at risk from unemployment in 20 targeted local areas across Australia.
Specifically, our Compact with Young Australians requires young Australians under the age of 25 to be earning or learning  -  either in full time employment or in full time education or training.
All these measures are intended to guarantee that as the education revolution rolls out across Australia, we put in the maximum effort to make the benefits of that revolution available to every young Australian, because we believe passionately in the power of education to transform a person's life opportunities.
It was a similar vision for the power of education that inspired the establishment of the Australian National University by the Chifley Government in 1946.
The ANU is the only Australian university to be established by a federal Act of Parliament. What you may not know  -  as we battle the challenges thrown at us by the current global financial crisis  -  is that the ANU could have been established decades earlier had it not been for an earlier global meltdown.
The idea first started kicking around in the late 1920s, with calls for “Australia's Oxford”  -  a great national research and residential university, where students from all around the nation would come to study honours degrees or pursue postgraduate research.
The Cabinet of the time went as far as setting up a committee to investigate the idea. The committee agreed in principle that the university was needed, but they could not agree on whether it should be a teaching university for the Canberra community, or a post-graduate research institute working closely with the then Council for Scientific and Industrial Research - the CSIR.
Discussions were heated, battlelines were drawn, and those advocating a teaching institute  -  to be called The Canberra University  -  had the numbers, but before the final vote could be taken, Wall Street crashed. The world plunged into the Great Depression. And the CSIR decided that there was not much point in spending the 50 pounds needed to bring the committee together for its last meeting.
So the idea languished through the Depression and most of World War Two, but in 1943, the Curtin Government  -  at the prompting of HC “Nugget” Coombs  -  took up the vision for a national centre of higher learning, and on August 1, 1946, under Prime Minister Chifley, the federal parliament passed The Australian National University Act 1946-47.
But the vote was far from unanimous. John Leckie, an Opposition Senator from Victoria, described the vision for the ANU as a “synthetic, provincial university”. Adair Blain, the member for the Northern Territory, feared that “ratbag” views would infest the University through the inclusion of the Research School of Social Sciences. And the then Leader of Her Majesty's Opposition, one Robert Menzies, confessed “to a mild feeling of horror” at the university's name.
According to Mr Menzies, as he was at the time, it should have been called The Canberra University. He told the House:
“I cannot imagine anybody becoming extraordinarily enthusiastic about the proposed title. If institutions of this kind are to be real, and not merely scientific shops, they must develop some esprit de corps, their own character and colour, and make their own mark upon those who pass through them.”
Six decades down the track, there's no doubt that this university is a national treasure, and has made its mark on those fortunate enough to have passed through it.
And there is a pattern here. The Fisher Government  -  the first national Labor government to win a parliamentary majority anywhere in the world  -  decided that Canberra would be our national capital. Four decades later, the Curtin and Chifley Labor Governments decided that our national capital needed a national university.
The wording of the Act which established this University was pedestrian at best. It described the functions of the ANU as:
(a) To encourage, and provide facilities for, post-graduate research and study, both generally and in relation to subjects of national importance to Australia;
(b) To provide facilities for university education for persons who elect to avail themselves of those facilities and are eligible to do so;
(c) Subject to the Statutes, to award and confer degrees and diplomas.
But the vision behind it was grand.
In his second reading speech, the Minister for Post-War Reconstruction, John Dedman, spoke of an institution that would:
“bring credit to Australia, advance the cause of learning and research in general, and take its rightful place amongst the great universities of the world.”
And as Nugget Coombs wrote in his autobiography, “Trial Balance”:
“The university was therefore to be the most bountiful of the sources from which would flow the intellectual energy which was to power the peaceful revolution, ushering in the ‘century of the common man', which leaders of all political persuasions here and abroad had promised.”
And 60 years on, the ANU has an important role in a new education revolution. It already ranks as Australia's leading university by global university ranking systems, and the research achievements of the ANU speak for themselves  -  including two Nobel Prizes in medical research.
The time has now come  -  60 years on  -  to discuss where the ANU should be in another 40 years, when this great institution celebrates its centenary. Consistent with its Charter, how do we in the 21st Century imagine a future vision for Australia's national university?
Earlier this year I announced that the Australian Government will be developing compacts with each of the nation's universities. Among other things, these compacts will set out the arrangements for distributing performance-based funding for teaching and research activity.
The ANU's Vice-Chancellor Ian Chubb has been a strong advocate for these compacts because of their potential to foster specialisation, diversity and excellence. These reforms will herald a new era for the operation and funding of Australian higher education.
Compacts will play a key role in implementing our reforms and ensuring improved outcomes from increased Commonwealth investment. Our compact with the ANU will be especially important given the ANU's special place as a strategic endowment for our nation. 
The Australian Government's vision for the ANU is to build on this great national endowment. The Compact that we sign with the ANU will reflect the status of the ANU as a university of national significance.
The Compact will help ensure that Australia retains and builds capacity in academic areas and disciplines of national importance. It will be their intrinsic importance, consistent with its legislative charter, that drives the future profile of ANU, not just the ebb and flow of undergraduate demand or popularity.
ANU is a research-rich university of high quality. It is a University with a high proportion of graduate students, particularly PhD students. And it is a University where the richness of its research and the quality of its performance creates a unique educational environment in Australia.
Over and above this Compact, it is my vision that a new re-invigorated strategic relationship is established between the ANU and the Australian Government. A relationship that puts education and research at the centre of building robust public policy. A relationship that grows excellence in policy analysis, policy advice and public sector strategic leadership.
A strategic relationship would be based around an agreement between the Australian Government and the ANU that sets out the overarching arrangements to govern and guide the relationship. This agreement would provide the foundation to undertake joint initiatives in key areas such as public service training, the study of Asia and national security.
In the 1930s, Ernest Burgmann wrote that Canberra:
“... long remained an offence to vast numbers of Australians who heard of it with their ears but who had never seen it and strangely enough did not want to see it with their own eyes.”
But, he also added  -  perhaps with a premature sense of confidence:
“This phase is passing.”
Canberra is known  -  sometimes disparagingly  -  as a public service town. Indeed, 37 per cent of the 160,000 members of the Australian Public Service live here. So it makes sense to harness the resources of our national university to enhance the administration of the Commonwealth.
There is good work being done through the collaborative Australia New Zealand School of Government, which is dedicated to promoting public sector leadership and policy.
The next challenge is how do we take that to the next level? How do we meet the future professional needs of our official community?
The public service is at present discussing its future challenges: improving the quality of public sector management, leadership, information technology systems, and budgeting and finance.
And these debates are of critical importance to the nation, because of the great burden of responsibility that rests on our public service.
What we need in Canberra is a much more robust and integrated exchange of ideas between our academics, our politicians and our public service, and more intensive professional preparation for senior roles in government. Imagine if this country engaged its academics in thinking about the way ahead for the public service with initiatives which, in their totality, would be like the Kennedy School of Government at Harvard.
Our bureaucrats and our politicians need to be challenged by the larger world of ideas and the best research and policy work being undertaken across the world. They need to be grappling with the great long term challenges to public policy:
     * How do we balance the roles of the market and the state, given the financial market implosions we have just witnessed?
     * What should our health system look like in 10, 20, 30 years time?
     * How do we deal with climate change and revolutionise the energy sources of the global economy?
     * How can we close the gap of Indigenous disadvantage?
     * How do we best prepare for the Asia-Pacific Century?
These are critical public policy challenges  -  but the answers do not necessarily lie only within the public service and elected politicians.
So what does this mean for an institution like the ANU?
At the moment, there are thick walls between academia and public administration. Between intellectuals and public policy practitioners. Between those with the deepest analytical understanding of the science of government and those who day to day practise that science here in Canberra and in state capitals and regional centres around Australia.
These thick walls prevent the flow of knowledge and experience between public policy practitioners and academic experts.
Academia should not be a life sentence.
This is not the case in the United States, for example, where these are much more merged communities. Where the independence of the academic community is respected, but its expertise is regularly called upon by governments for the greater public good.
Breaking down those barriers would enhance the quality of both government and centres of academic endeavour.
This is doubly necessary in a smaller country like Australia, where it is vital that we engage all elements of the national talent pool for the national good.
Our vision should also extend beyond our shores, to making Australia the global go-to place for the study of the vast and challenging continent of Asia, which is now challenging our future. The ANU already excels in the study of Asia  -  not just languages but history, culture, religion, politics, policy, international relations, and strategic and defence studies.
I have often said that my vision is for Australia to be the most Asia-literate country in the collective West. Given that this is the now century of the Asia Pacific, how do we make sure that this becomes a reality?
Recently, Michael Wesley, formerly of the Asia Institute at Griffith University and now the head of the Lowy Institute, published a report into the study of Asian languages in Australia. His conclusion was simple  -  we need to do much more.
As he noted:
“Over three-quarters of Australians speak English only  -  making Australia the third most monolingual developed nation in the world.”
This means that in a globalised world, Australia faces a skills shortfall: “the ability to understand and operate in languages and cultures other than our own.”
And in a globalised world if we do not fix this shortfall, we run the risk of falling behind.
Wesley noted that this is about more than just studying languages:
“A comprehensive Asia literacy program must simultaneously teach the culture which the language articulates.”
That means studying the history and modern culture; it means understanding the society in which the language is spoken.
The great institutions of the United States have strong Asian studies program, including Harvard, Yale and Berkeley. The ANU's Asian studies course was inspired in part by the vision of creating an Antipodean version of the London School of Oriental and African Studies.
Our question today is how do we take these models into the 21st century to create an unparalleled resource for both the nation  -  and the nation's official community in Canberra as well? How does the ANU  -  possibly in partnership with other universities and in partnership with the Australian Government  -  rise to this future challenge?
Because here in Canberra  -  the home to this nation's diplomatic officials, defence officials, trade officials and to the international diplomatic community  -  there is a practical need for this expertise to be harnessed in full.
I spoke before about the new strategic relationship between the Australian Government and the ANU. To spearhead this new relationship, I want to explore the establishment of a National Security College. 
National security is now a very complex policy environment and senior officials need new sets of knowledge and skills to operate effectively and strategically within this new environment. Last December in my National Security Statement I announced the establishment of a national Security Executive Development Program. 
The development of this program is underway, however I envisage that this be developed into a suite of world-leading courses that will be undertaken by senior officials working in the national security community. 
I want the Program to develop a generation of senior executive officials who will have a shared understanding of the national security strategic environment, architecture and collaborative culture - and a shared understanding of the capabilities, priorities and challenges that exist across the national security community. Such a college would help develop the next generation of national security leaders and more broadly enhance strategic leadership in our community.
To give this program a “home” and recognised brand of excellence, some preliminary discussions have commenced with the ANU about the establishment of a National Security College as a joint venture established under our strategic relationship with the ANU. These initiatives, incorporating national security and public service excellence, would not only help generate the future leaders of the Australian public service.
The strategic relationship would also build the capabilities for university-based experts to support the Government and contribute to policy making. Preliminary discussions will explore models for how such a venture could be progressed.
As long ago as the 1930s, Ernest Burgmann was arguing for a national university in Canberra, and he was arguing for a wider role for Australia in the world, and particularly in the Asia-Pacific region. He told his readers in the “Southern Churchman” that Australia lived off the main trade routes of the world but did not feel the tremendous stimulus to thought and action under which other continents live. Australia, he said, was in danger of becoming a backwater and passing her days in a fool's paradise.
Burgmann said:
“She has no schools for the sustained, careful study of international relations.
The problems of the Pacific, which are a matter of life and death for her, are left to the few who happen to be interested, and to the officials who may or may not have had special training for their tasks.
We need to have students studying in Oriental universities.
We should welcome students from the East to our own universities.”
Since Burgmann's death, these things have come to pass, in his own backyard. As we gather here tonight in a place named after Burgmann, it falls to us to build upon the foundations laid by those great advocates and architects of this world-class university  -  Curtin, Chifley, Coombs, Dedman, Burgmann, and men like the great champion of higher education, Kim Beazley senior, father of the Chancellor of the ANU today.
We share pride in their magnificent achievements, so many decades on. We share their vision for the role of this great national university. And we resolve to renew that vision for the ANU and our institutions of higher education, to play an even greater role in enabling Australia to meet the great challenges of the century that lies ahead.
[ends]


I begin by acknowledging the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
It's a pleasure to join you here at the National Library today to launch Tom Keneally's latest book, Australians: Origins to Eureka.
Tom is of course one of our nation's living national treasures.
Australians love him.
Despite him being a passionate Manly supporter  -  underlining the fact that we are all capable of human error.
Earlier this year, I asked Tom for a signed copy of his biography of Abraham Lincoln.
I presented it as an official gift to President Obama when I visited the White House in March of this year.
A bold move to give an Abe Lincoln bio to a man sometimes described as Abe Lincoln's successor.
A doubly bold move when that particular biography (which is less than hagiography) reflects the particular insights of an instinctively rebellious Irish Australian.
There aren't many people who'd be game to take on the challenge Tom's set himself with this history.
To write three volumes that span Australia's entire history.
A history that speaks to all Australians.
And a history that covers old ground, yet breaks new ground as well.
As Australians, we belong to an ancient land with a sprawling, complex and rollicking story.
A story that begins with the most ancient of continuing cultures in human history.
Ours is a story of an extraordinary national achievement:
Forging a united, prosperous, democratic nation drawn from the dregs of Empire, from successive generations of people liberated from penal servitude; from Irish famine; from persecution and poverty from practically every land.
And despite this extraordinary admixture, we prevailed.
It's a story that's been picked over by some of the world's finest poets, authors and filmmakers.
A story both of glory and of shame; of courage and sometimes absurdity.
A story that from time to time has ignited great controversy.
A story of things improbable becoming possible, and ultimately through Australian ingenuity, becoming not merely possible but then a reality which is indeed tangible.
So the task of compressing Australia's national history into three volumes calls for a man of extraordinary talent.
And Tom certainly fits that bill.
Tom is that rare combination  -  -  storyteller, historian, and proud son of Australia.
The kind of a man who gets the dirt under his fingernails as he excavates through the archives and sedimentary layers of our national story.
And who then knocks out the sort of prose that wins you a Booker prize.
And he speaks in a voice that every Australian recognises, because it's the voice of our country - from a man whose love of this country leaps off every page.
Tom's great insight is that Australians love a good yarn, especially when it's about people we can relate to.
So he hasn't given us a landscape study of our country's history.
He's given us a portrait gallery.
A very well-stocked gallery, I might add, and not just the usual suspects.
Yes, there are the ones we all know - like James Cook.
But I don't remember my history teacher ever mentioning his chronic bowel problems.
Although discretion may have been the better part of valour there, on the part of our history teachers at school.
With teenagers, the mere mention of the word bowel can disrupt an entire afternoon's work.
But Tom doesn't hold back.
He makes us visualise James Cook suffering “behind screens of acacia and melaleuca” all the way up the Australian coast.
Tom also gives us sketches of the ordinary people who coped, as we still do today, with the tragedies and triumphs of Australian life.
Tom has this extraordinary eye for the little details that turn a biographical note into a living, breathing life-size character.
Tom's insight springs from his compassion, his humanity, and his own rich life experience.
Tom is indeed, a deeply caring bloke.
His compassion shines through in his moving accounts of the tough, tragic and very human characters who two hundred years ago lived, loved and died  -  and helped build our nation.
People like Christopher Magee, an early arrival, who sat in his doorway with a bottle of rum in his hand.
He'd drink one glass, then pour another on to his wife's freshly dug grave.
Because he said she'd loved it during her life.
Or Sarah Davenport, who came to Australia on the same boat that brought Henry Parkes.
Fourteen days into the voyage she lost her infant son, Albert.
He'd been splashed with boiling gruel through the clumsiness of a fellow passenger.
In her grief, Sarah suffered a miscarriage.
But she rallied, and she survived.
What's more, she devoted herself to the service of others, acting as the ship's midwife and caring for her three surviving children.
As Tom says, although most immigrants had better luck, few could exceed Sarah Davenport in ruggedness of soul.
And it was men and women like this  -  and like my forebears, the cast-offs of imperial Britain and Ireland  -  who laid the foundations for a nation that in time would become a laboratory of social experimentation, a cohesive society and ultimately one of the world's most stable and prosperous democracies.
Tom of course has a quintessentially Australian sense of modesty.
He calls himself a ‘cheap drunk' when it comes to history.
A bloke intoxicated with Australia's great stories.
A bloke who grasps just how extraordinary our national story is.
Who convincingly shows a great national story doesn't need wars, revolutions and bloodshed.
To anyone who might think our national story is a dreary one, I'd just say this:
Read this book.
This isn't dead history.
This is history with a pulse.
History that comes alive, page after page.
History that reflects Tom's passion to leave for future generations an account of our national story that is both accurate and inspirational.
The book is also a reminder of just how much history matters.
I'm reminded of the insights of John Keane, the Australian author of the definitive biography of the great American revolutionary Thomas Paine, and yes, I'm wading my way through that biography at present.
As Keane says, historical biography is itself, in essence, a form of democracy.
As he says, and I quote him:
“Democracy among the living requires democracy among the dead, in that votes must be extended to the most disenfranchised of all constituencies - our silenced ancestors”.
It's a remarkable insight that deserves attention.
At its highest, biography writing isn't “wielding the pen to protect an idol”.
It isn't muck-raking.
And it's not just ripping yarns.
In fact, it does have a higher purpose.
Biography is the fulfilment of a duty owed by every generation to those who have gone before us, and able to be claimed against those yet to be born.
A duty to capture, to preserve and to transmit the stories - the legacy of each generation.
Because a human voice - a human life - retains its validity, its power and its relevance beyond its physical demise.
As we build on the work done in our name and on our behalf by our forebears, we honour them best by listening to their voices from the past. Tom's book does that.
As Keane reminds us, it's not easy to untangle the complex threads of a human life far removed from the biographer's lived reality  -  as he says, “a biography is never straightforward”.
But the great challenge of the biographer is to offer readers the opportunity to ponder the subject themselves, “thereby encouraging them to tinker with their own sense of reality”.
It is two hundred years since the death of Thomas Paine - yet in Keane's world, Paine today “strikes our times like a trumpet blast from an ancient world”.
His ideas are still debated, and his words are still quoted, by the decision-makers of the present day.
And we are cautioned not to consign him to the shelf of those who are described as “dead white European males”.
Instead, he suggests, Paine can prove to us still that “the dead are sometimes more alive than the living.”
Of course few individuals achieve Tom Paine's place in history.
But Tom Keneally's book certainly reminds there is a rich array of lives that have together shaped the character this nation, Australia, just as Paine did for his adopted nation, America.
And as a biographer, I suspect that Tom's background in literary fiction gives him better insights than most into the workings of the human heart, as he has reflected in these pages on those attributes that together make up our national character.
The love for history is, I believe, the hand-maiden of country.
Not a blind, unthinking love - a love that refuses to accept that mistakes were made and opportunities lost.
But a history that unapologetically celebrates the good.
A history that equally unapologetically exposes the bad.
And a history that draws upon both to inform our current age.
That I believe is the best approach to the great stories that make up our national story.
It's not hagiography.
Nor is it futile brow-beating.
Instead, it's a willingness to embrace the past, warts and all.
To recognise there are competing strands in any nation's history  -  of inclusion and exclusion; of hope and of fear; of progress and of stagnation.
And, informed by a genuine engagement with our history, to move forward with absolute optimism and determination for the future.
In my address to Parliament last year on the national apology, I expressed my belief that a people “must become fully reconciled to their past if they are to go forward with confidence to embrace their future”.
On that occasion, I was dealing with the unfinished business of our reconciliation with the First Australians.
More broadly, I believe the time has now come to move beyond the arid intellectual debates of the history wars and the culture wars of recent years.
Time to leave behind us the polarisation that began to infect every discussion of our nation's past.
To go beyond the so-called “black armband” view that refused to confront some hard truths about our past, as if our forebears were all men and women of absolute nobility, without spot or blemish.
But time, too, to go beyond the view that we should only celebrate the reformers, the renegades and revolutionaries, thus neglecting or even deriding the great stories of our explorers,  of our pioneers, and of our entrepreneurs.
Any truthful reflection of our nation's past is that these are all part of the rich fabric of our remarkable national story.
Too often we underestimate the importance of history in the modern world.
Our history gives us a legitimate sense of being part of a story much bigger than ourselves.
A story that goes beyond our own place and time.
A story when told at its best is capable of liberating us from the arrogance of the present, to recognise with some humility the enormity of the challenges we have faced in the past, and with sober responsibility, the great choices we face for the future.
History is the memory of a nation or a civilisation.
It has been said that a nation without history is like an individual without memory.
Just as it is hard to imagine personality without memory, so too is it hard to imagine national identity without history.
For individuals, memory also informs and shapes behaviour.
And so it does with nations.
The histories they choose to embrace as their collective memory of the past become the foundations upon which they build their futures  -  sometimes consciously, other times not.
For young nations, this is far more important, as our shared memories (with the exception of the First Australians) are recent and often diffuse.
Some say this is why we need a single, official, received narrative of Australian history.
But as a nation and people, we are far too freedom-loving to believe in any singular account of our history.
I do believe, however, that a core chronology of events is essential for understanding our nation's history.
We should all agree that a sequence of events took place  -  and that critical events, people and movements that have shaped our national story.
History can never be only a matter of interpretation.
But it's time we called a truce to the history wars between a straight narrative history that brooks no contradictions, and an extreme relativism that is only about interpretation and not about events, is in fact unsustainable. 
In a liberal democratic society, we can agree that events happened while we agree to differ in how we interpret them.
On this basis, we can all engage in the debates about the complexities of the good, the bad, the ugly and the vast ocean that lies between where most of us all reside.
That's a healthy and democratic approach to our nation's story.
Within this framework, it is also worthwhile confronting the view we sometimes hear that Australian history lacks sufficient colour, movement and drama to command the attention of current generations, let alone to inspire those of the future.
Again, I commend everyone to the pages of this new history by Tom Keneally.
That argument assumes that there are no great histories without revolution, without civil war and rivers of blood shed in pursuit of contested wars for our nation's future.
And that without such traumatic events, history is somehow of a second order.
Like any other Australian nationalist, of course, I'd strongly disagree.
Not just because we've never shirked our international responsibilities to engage in the great conflicts that have shaped so much of the history of the world over the last hundred years.
But also because not every great history is a story of revolution and destruction.
Just as not every great film is necessarily an action movie.
We should never underestimate just how far from ordinary and in fact extraordinary our own national story, Australia's story, is.
Because somehow we  -  this motley collectivity of souls, drawn from all corners of the earth - could in the space of a few generations cause such an extraordinary national experiment to work.
Building a stable and successful democracy, where matters of great contention are resolved at the ballot box and not through the barrel of a gun, making us one of the oldest continuing democracies in the world.
A people that uniquely has crafted a nation for a continent, and a continent for a nation.
A nation that has carved an economy from an inhospitable earth to build one of the most prosperous on earth  -  rich in innovation, rich in enterprise.
A nation that has so often led the world in social progress like rights for women and rights for working people, and building one of the most open, most progressive, least class-based societies in the world.
A nation that from its beginnings has etched within its soul, in fact within its DNA, an almost inalienable sense of fairness - what we call in our own vernacular the ‘fair go'.
A nation that time and again has shown itself open to extraordinary adaptation and change  -  moving in less than a generation from a White Australia Policy to embracing the diversity of the cultures that now contribute to our national identity.
A country and community confident of its place in the region and in the world  -  straddling uniquely the challenges and complexities of our Indigenous antiquity, our European history and our Asian geography.
Our national story is still very much a work in progress.
We're a nation still wrestling with our reconciliation with the First Australians whom we seek to embrace afresh today, as brothers and sisters in our common search for a common future.
The challenges of poverty remain with us.
The challenges of intolerance.
The challenges of the devastation being wrought on our environment.
But by any reasonable measure, the achievements of this Australian nation are of an extraordinary, rather than ordinary nature.
As with so many things, the deepest insights into our own condition are often provided by those outside it.
And from those who come from abroad to make their home with us.
Time and again, they remind us just how remarkably successful this Australian experiment has been.
It is something we should embrace and celebrate more ourselves.
To think that in this couple of centuries, the convicts of England, the cast-offs of Empire, the exiled children of Erin's shore - those whom Churchill reportedly said were of ‘bad stock'  -  coupled with successive generations escaping the hell of holocaust, genocide, famine and war throughout the century past - could build a culture and a nation in an inhospitable land the equal of any in the world.
A democratic, prosperous and compassionate nation, blessed with that winsome wisdom of knowing never to take ourselves too seriously.
So for us today, perhaps it's time also to turn the page.
To embrace a balanced, reflective but positive view of our past that both informs and inspires our future.
I believe we can do this here with a great love of country but without contempt, derision or fear of others.
One does not have to follow from the other.
One is not automatically the obverse of the other.
Perhaps here too we have something unique to offer  -  given the sorry history of xenophobic nationalisms elsewhere.
Instead, with quiet reflection, reasoned celebration, and the respectful engagement of cultures more ancient than our own, ours can be an unrestrained optimism for our Australian future.
A challenging century lies ahead of us.
A century that for the first time in our settled history may not be dominated by one part of the Anglosphere or another.
One which as the century evolves will take us into genuinely uncharted waters in geopolitics, the global economy and technological change.
And one where the existential threat of climate change could change forever the land that gives us life.
These are the great challenges that lie ahead.
But the task of tackling them is made easier if as a people, a culture and a country, we are fortified afresh by the values and stories of our nation from its earliest times.
So Tom, let's hope you can inspire more Australians to indulge with you in what you poetically describe as your historical ‘drinking benders'.
At more than five hundred pages, this is something for binge historians.
For my part, so far I've only had the time for tipple or two.
But before I close and launch this great book, let me quote a little bit of it to you. And that's Tom reflections on the Second Fleet, which I found extraordinarily moving. And those who came out on that Second Fleet, and what was the good ship Neptune, but in fact became the bad ship Neptune.
Tom writes of “two young men aboard the Neptune, who would have a large pace in the story of New South Wales.
“One was a young man with a new rank, and a touch bumptious about it. John Macarthur...a little over twenty years of age, and a Lieutenant in the 1023nd Regiment, the newly created New South Wales Corps, a man of handsome features that must have satisfied the broad streak of narcissism in him. He was a devour duellist, because he was a man of edgy honour”. I like that expression.
The other was: “The other fascinating passenger on board Neptune was a young Irishman, D'Arcy Wentworth, aged about 27, a highwayman-cum-surgeon: a voluntary passenger in one sense; a virtual convict in another.”
...
“Neptune's Captain Trail, a 44-year-old Orkney Island Scot, at one time master of the Captain Bligh, took over command of the vessel from the dismissed Captain Gilbert. The Neptune now held over five hundred people....of the thousand convicts to be shipped. Most of them were housed on the orlop deck, the third deck down, with standing room below the beams of the ceiling only 5 feet 7 inches.”
...
“The convicts slept in four rows of sleeping trays, one row on either side of the ship, and two down the middle.”
...
“In port and for much of the journey, each convict was chained by the wrist or by the ankles, in many cases on Neptune two and two together, and indefinitely so. Trail must have known the impact this would have on cleanliness and health”.
...
“The sanitary arrangements were very primitive- on the orlop deck large tubs were provided to ‘ease nature'. These would be knocked over by accident or carelessness or rough seas. Below decks was thus a damp, under-aired overcrowded misery.”
“Among those who came on board the huge Neptune from the hulk Dunkirk was a lusty young man in his mid twenties, Robert Towers...his health had gone down a little on the damp lower decks of Dunkirk, but on the crowded prison deck of Neptune, where he wore slaver shackles around his ankles and wrists, received short-weighted rations and got insufficient air and exercise, he began to feel really poorly. The Neptune, at anchor and at sea, would ultimately finish him, though it would take seven months until they brought his corpse up to deck and committed him to a distant ocean”. 
As one contemporary account said, “the slave trade is merciful, compared with what I have seen in this fleet; in that it is in the interest of the slave master to preserve the healths and lives of their captives, they having a joint benefit, with the owners. In this fleet, this second fleet, the more they can withhold from the unhappy wretches, the more provisions they have to dispose of in a foreign market; and the earlier in the voyage they die, the longer they the masters can draw the deceased's allowance for themselves...if therefore highly concerns the Government, to lodge in future, a controlling power in each ship over these low-life barbarous masters, to keep them honest”.
That's something of what occurred when people travelled here. My forbear, Thomas Rudd, was on that vessel. And when I reflect upon this extraordinary convict history, and the extraordinary privations they suffered, this tome brings alive this great Australian story, to us all.
So Tom, with those remarks, can I say that we are indeed honoured to be here today to celebrate the launch of this great book. It could be a great contribution to the telling of Australia's national story.
I'm looking forward to the chance to get a really decent read of a lot of it.
And in that spirit, it's my great pleasure to officially launch ‘Australians: Origins to Eureka'.


E &amp; O E  -  PROOF ONLY
PM: Thanks very much to Matt Finnis, CEO of the AFL players Association. Kate Ellis the Minister for Sport, Sam Mitchell the Captain of Hawthorn, Jason McCartney, Johno Chase from Step Back Think, Daniel Jackson from Richmond- and friends one and all of the AFL, for what is an important cause for the country, which is how do we deal with this problem on our streets, because it affects too many people we know and love.
One in five Australians are under 25, and make a huge contribution to Australia, our economy, our culture, our sport and our nation. Growing up has always had its challenges. It's a time when young people are asked to take on more responsibility for themselves, for their relationships, for their communities, for their families, and to make choices that will be important in what they do with the rest of their lives.
Growing up today has some new challenges as well- in fact, some unprecedented challenges. Our society is undergoing major changes, as family structures change, and family networks weaken. Young Australians today are the first generation likely to spend more time with friends than with their family. Employers are demanding more adaptable skills than ever before. And at the same time, young people tell us that a lack of transport and youth-friendly public spaces are leaving them even more isolated.
These are some of the challenges out there, and we need to be frank in the way in which we deal with them. As a nation we need to do better in supporting young people negotiate these challenges, and to support them to grow up safe, healthy and with the skills, confidence and resilience, resilience to participate fully in every part of our national life. One in four young Australians aged between 16 and 24 has a mental health disorder, yet three quarters of them do not receive professional help.
Negative perceptions of body image, particularly for young women, are of growing concern.
Young people who have grown up during a period of unprecedented prosperity are now feeling the effects of the global economic recession.  Youth unemployment is now sitting at 12 per cent, compared with 9 per cent before the downturn. New communications technologies create enormous opportunities for young people to access information, develop friendships and communicate with others around the world but they can also lead to young people being the victims of crime, or becoming the targets of cyber-bullying.
And a lack of physical exercise is a concern too, a decline in some respects of community participation in sport. Obesity is on the rise.  The most recent figures suggest that 28 per cent of young men and 20 per cent of young women are overweight or obese. 
We also have potential long-term health risks from the culture of binge drinking that affects so many Australians, particularly our young people. About one in five men and one in six women aged between 18 and 24 drink alcohol to dangerous levels at least once a week, it's due to reflect on that again, about one in five men and one in six women aged between 18 and 24 drink alcohol to dangerous levels at least once a week.
Australians have so far been spared the horror of the tragic school gun massacres that have occurred in the United States. We do not have the culture of knife crime that has developed in the United Kingdom in recent years. But we were all shocked by the death of Jai Morcom in a schoolyard fight last week.
And we have unacceptably high levels of alcohol-related violence outside our pubs and clubs. That's why the Government is developing a national strategy for young Australians, with young Australians and in large part to be delivered by young Australians. And also, as part of our national health reform agenda for the future. We'll be working our way through this in the time ahead, it will embrace seven core priorities.
One- empowering young Australians in their schools, their TAFEs and their Universities to shape their own futures. Two- supporting young Australians within their families. Three-  mobilising young Australians within their communities. Four- enabling young Australians to participate safely and confidently online. Five- equipping young Australians with the skills and personal networks they need for employment. Six- strengthening early intervention with young Australians to help prevent any problems getting worse and to help young people get their lives back on track. And finally, establishing clear cut legal consequences for behaviours that endanger the safety of others.
Our aim is to build the healthiest Australia possible.  Our actions for young Australians will form part of the national health reform agenda that the government is currently developing in response to the National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission that we received in July. Today's announcements are an important step in young people, community leaders and Government pulling together to make a difference in young people's lives. This Just Think campaign brings the community leadership of the AFL Player's Association and the AFL captains to engage the whole community in talking about city violence and to encourage those who are out enjoying a drink, including young people, to take responsibility for their actions.
I have had the opportunity to talk to young people who have been affected by alcohol related violence and the consequences can be devastating. A group of young people in Melbourne called Step Back, Think and Jono Chase is here with us today together with others, they got together to combat alcohol related violence after their friend James Macready-Bryan was bashed almost three years ago, on the night of his 20th birthday, leaving him brain-damaged and wheelchair-bound.
One of their aims was for the AFL to take the lead on combating violence  -  and I'm sure that they will be delighted about the launch of this campaign today. Another remarkable person that has campaigned on anti-violence is Jonty Bush, the 2009 Young Australian of the Year. After losing her younger sister and her dad, Jonty went on to become the Chief Executive of the Queensland Homicide Victims Support Group at age 27 and developed the One Punch Can Kill campaign.
These young people, Step Back, Think and One Punch Can Kill and others are not willing to sit on their hands while accidents like this occur, incidents like this occur, acts of violence like this occur around the country, neither should the rest of the community be indifferent as well. I am delighted to announce that the Australian Government will be contributing $132,000 to the AFL as part of the $2 million Club Champions Program  -  which utilises the power of sport to tackle irresponsible drinking in our community.
And the “Just Think” campaign, led by the AFL Player's Association, is the type of initiative of which this Government is proud. Can I also say it's fantastic that you as professional footballers are getting behind this. So many young people look up to you, you know that. Therefore establishing an Australian view that it's fine to go out and have fun, it's great to go out and have a party with your friends, it's fine to go out and have a drink, so long as you know where to draw the line, and so long as you know what the consequences are when you don't draw the line and that's what this campaign, Just Think, is all about.
If I could say something else positive about what the AFL players association are doing, I've been introduced to their work with youth homelessness. I've spoken quite recently with the Melbourne City Mission and about the work they are doing about the city and the State for homelessness. I think it's fantastic that the players through their association have got together to build a homelessness refuge for young people. I think that it shows a whole lot of positive contribution and it shows Australia at its best.
So again, young people are looking up to professional players and they see good stuff being done, good stuff for youth homelessness, good stuff when it comes to responsible drinking. This is the sort of stuff which the Australian government is so proud to get behind and I commend you for your efforts.
By the way, as a Lions man, I look forward to the finals series kicking off this weekend with a home final in Brissie and the inevitability of a Brisbane win. The Just Think campaign is a fantastic way to launch this final series. Footy is so loved by so many Australians. It's great that footy will be a vehicle through which we promote this attitude of responsible drinking for the future. Congratulations to all of you for being in this with your heart and your soul and your mind and your chequebook.
Thank you.


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
It is an honour to be delivering the third John Paterson Oration  -  following on from the previous addresses by former Prime Ministers John Howard and Helen Clark.
While the Australia New Zealand School of Government is still in its early years, it is already building a tradition of helping to shape the next generation of public service leaders on both sides of the Tasman.
One of the important traditions it is creating is this oration  -  an excellent occasion to advance public debate about future directions for public administration and the public service.
The oration is named after John Paterson, a great leader and a greater reformer, a man who in particular led the way in reform of community services, health and infrastructure in both NSW and Victoria.
John was no Sir Humphrey Appleby.
He earnt a reputation as a restless intellect, a person of great compassion and yet a tough-minded reformer.
He once said that more could be learned about organisational change from the literature on revolutionary war than from the teaching of business schools.
Paterson said that in the battle to change institutions  -  and I quote:
“...peace only becomes possible when you have captured all the territory, re-educated all the prisoners who are willing to become loyal citizens, and put to the sword those who remain unreconstructed.”
John displayed what could be described as a firm approach to public sector management.
He clearly encountered some obstacles in reforming the regional water board of the Hunter Valley in New South Wales - but he also showed a capacity to see the challenges he faced in a much wider context.
The task of public service reform confronting leaders like John Paterson in the 1980s was to modernise large, powerful and sclerotic public sector organisations.
In the simplest terms, the task was to make the public service genuinely serve the interests of the wider economy and society, after decades in which many government agencies had become increasingly managed for the purposes of serving themselves.
Today's challenges are not the same as those John Paterson faced.
But they are equally important  -  broad in scope; deep in complexity, and confronting us a time when new global, national and local forces of change are blowing across the shores of Australian public administration.
These are challenges that will require a new generation of public service leadership, a new standard of public service excellence and therefore a new era of public service reform.
The Government I lead came to office pledging to reinvigorate the Westminster tradition of a merit-based, independent public service committed to the highest-quality policy making.
We chose the word reinvigorate carefully.
We did not say “reinvent”, because the APS is a strong, professional public service that has served successive governments very well.
The professionalism of the public service has been evident since the first day after the 2007 election, when I received the first handover briefings from Dr Peter Shergold and other senior departmental secretaries.
The quality of that briefing, and the work of public servants to ensure a seamless transition to government in the following weeks and months, was testimony not only to the competence of the public service but to the value it placed on continuity. 
And I note that my predecessor, Mr Howard, made the same point when delivering the Garran Oration in 1997, and I quote: 
“That power can be transferred in this calm, understated way is a supreme asset.''
This is truly one of the most remarkable features of the Westminster tradition, and it is one we should not merely take it for granted.
Its success is in part the result of the sweeping reforms to the public service a century and a half ago, in another era and in another place  -  through the Northcote-Trevelyan report in Britain in 1854.
That report not only created the modern British civil service but laid the foundations of the ethos of the APS almost half a century later.
At the time, Britain was undergoing major economic changes in the wake of industrialisation.
The Empire was expanding, people were on the move and Europe was alive with revolutionary foment.
And the British civil service was riven with patronage, incompetence and corruption.
The recommendations of the Northcote-Trevelyan report  -  a response to crisis in its time  -  helped create a civil service that was independent, impartial, recruited by competitive examination and promoted on merit.
In time, its impact stretched to the Australian colonies, where both Victoria and Queensland sought to limit political patronage by introducing competitive entry exams into their public services.
And it profoundly shaped the culture of the APS after its formation in 1901.
But Australia never simply copied the British model.
The APS never recreated the class structure in the way the British civil service did, with Sir Humphrey's Oxbridge-educated administrator class unfailingly at the top.
Instead, some of Australia's leading public servants have been the children of builders, boot makers, railway station masters and refugees, or they left school at 15 to be telegraph messengers and bank clerks.
What counted was not their modest beginnings but their fitness for the job.
Take Sir Roland Wilson, our longest serving Treasury Secretary and the son of a west coast Tasmanian builder.
Or another former Treasury chief, Sir Richard Randall, who worked for eight years as a wool classer.
Or another, Ted Evans, who worked for 10 years of his early life as a PMG linesman.
And given that his replacement, current Treasury Secretary Ken Henry, is the son of a New South Wales timber worker, it is clear that the APS principle of promoting merit over privilege is alive and well.
And there is a second lesson from history that particularly resonates today.
As I said before, the periods of most active public service reform have been periods of rapid change and even upheaval in the wider society, times when change has forced the public service to develop new structures and skills, and find talented new people.
In the 1940s, the all-out war effort, followed by the huge post-war nation-building program, created a generational change in the APS.  For the first time there was an influx of brilliant outsiders to manage great wartime enterprises, to staff the departments of Treasury and Postwar Reconstruction and to establish the new foreign service.
At the time, the public service was a closed shop  -  the idea of outsiders joining was intensely controversial. So much so that when the economist, Roland Wilson - with doctorates from Oxford and Chicago - was recruited to the Bureau of Census and Statistics as the first government economics adviser in 1932, the staff of the Bureau went on strike!
The new public servants laid the foundations for decades of post-war prosperity and better living standards for Australians. They were among the first in the world to see and seize the opportunities of Keynesian economics and an active economic and social role for the post-war democratic state.
They managed the government's commitment to full employment and the development of a modern social security system, to a large immigration program, to enormous infrastructure projects such as the Snowy Mountains scheme, and to the beginnings of our national university system.
In other words, they were nation-builders  -  with their own professional public service tradition  -  with a sense that the words “prosper the Commonwealth” were etched deep in their intellect, their imagination and their sense of duty to the nation.
Nugget Coombs, a railway station master's son, is perhaps the best known of them  -  a man who earnt his place in any catalogue of the greatest Australians in our nation's history.
In his appointment to head the Department of Postwar Reconstruction, he was given an explicit brief to promote a much more activist role for the state.
And it was Nugget Coombs who, a generation later, chaired the famous Royal Commission into Australian Government Administration in 1974.
Nugget's broad vision for the role of the public service was reflected in his remark after releasing his report, that in the modern world the bureaucracy:
“...is not ‘an island entire unto itself' but a living part of Australian society, reflecting the strengths and weaknesses of the society.”
The Coombs Royal Commission came at another turning point for Australian society and Australian history.
The long post-war boom  -  in large part made possible by the reforms of the 1940s  -  created huge national wealth but also in time a culture of self-satisfaction, complacency and rigidity in the public service, in the broader economy and to some extent in society at large.
Public service structures created 30 years earlier struggled to cope with a time of profound economic and social change.
The Coombs Commission identified themes that have shaped the development of the APS ever since.
It argued that the public service had to become more responsive to the democratically elected government of the day, more efficient in its operations, and more diverse in the composition of its workforce - reflecting the growing diversity of the wider society.
Critically, it concluded that government administration was excessively centralised and excessively hierarchical.
It recommended greater devolution of management authority and of service delivery  -  including the idea of one-stop shops for citizens to access a range of services in the one place.
It found that  -  and I quote:
"better decisions will be made and better service given to people if authority and responsibility are devolved to officials close to where the action occurs.”
In that idea lies the foundation of our modern, decentralised public service.
The great themes of the Coombs Report were reflected in a decade and a half of reform from the early 1980s onwards. The public servants of that era - John Paterson among them - undertook a fundamental rethink of what government should do and how it should do it.
In difficult economic times, they helped to internationalise the Australian economy and to move beyond the policy complacency of previous decades. They were partners in a long-term reform agenda, whose central organisational principle was the enhancement of Australia's global competitiveness.
Within the ranks of the public service, they forced their colleagues to focus on efficiency, transparency and accountability to government, because taxpayer dollars were scarce and economic reform also meant the reform of government itself. 
They were modernisers. They had to be. There was no turning back.
In those years, all the major legislation governing the public service, some of it dating back to the early years of Federation, was completely rewritten. 
The budgetary, structural and other public service reforms of the 1980s and 1990s were as large in their time as those of the post-war reconstruction generation. They helped to produce Australia's long period of economic growth and they positioned us well for the challenge of the global economic crisis.
These were also the years when Coombs' vision of a more diverse public service, more representative of the Australian population, began to be realised. For example, in 1999, women outnumbered men for the first time and today account for nearly 58 per cent of the APS. More than one in three members of the Senior Executive Service is female, and while we have further to go, the proportion is rising.
That is just one example of how the APS has continued to change and evolve to meet the needs of its time.
Today, the APS again confronts a changing world, and the need to prepare for these future challenges.  I do not believe the changes required involve a revolution. Instead, the APS requires continuing reform.
As the Secretary of the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, Terry Moran, said in a recent speech, “the APS is not broken - it is not a renovator's opportunity”.
Cast your eyes across the governments of the world, and consider the quality of public administration that has been achieved in Australia across the 108 year history of the Australian Public Service. It is not completely without its faults or failings, but any fair-minded person would agree that Australia has been remarkably well served by the APS, and it has been remarkably stable, impartial and free from corruption.
It is no surprise that a British report last year reported that 87 per cent of Australian citizens expressed satisfaction with Federal government services. Or that the same report listed our public service third in a long list of similar countries - ahead of Canada, New Zealand, the USA and the UK - for its independence from political interference and in its capacity to give impartial advice.
Likewise, an assessment of the quality of e-government services and products of 192 UN member states in 2008 ranked Australia eighth in the world.
These are impressive results for a comparatively lean public service of just 160,000 employees  -  or just 1.5 per cent of the Australian workforce. But in the face of the challenges facing us in the decade ahead, it is not enough for us to say that the APS is doing a good job and therefore the status quo is fine.
In my address to the Senior Executive Service in April 2008, I spoke of the need to develop a culture of policy innovation and enhance the strategic policy capability of the APS. This means becoming more creative, and not just reactive.
It means the APS being bolder in its thinking, and doing more to consider the big picture  -  transformational policy change, not just piecemeal reform.
It means strengthening the APS's ability to deliver high-quality services and linking policy creation more closely to program implementation so that lessons learnt on the front line of service delivery feed back into the agencies that formulate policy.
Public servants, from portfolio Secretaries in Canberra to front-line workers at Centrelink, work tirelessly to put the citizen at the heart of everything they do. And critically, that the APS does more to attract, train and retain the very best people.
The APS must have its proper share of the nation's most talented people, because as I said last year to the SES, the challenges facing government are as tough, intellectually demanding and important for our nation's future, as the challenges facing any of our businesses or non-profit organisations. It is the view of the Government and the heads of the APS that only by hiring and promoting the best people can we solve the great challenges of our time.
From health reform to the education revolution; from our climate change strategy to dealing with national security threats; from tackling Indigenous disadvantage to building a globally competitive 21st century economy.
We are facing challenges so complex in their causes, so shifting in their natures, so contentious in the arguments they provoke and so radical in the solutions they demand that they cannot be addressed with business-as-usual thinking. 
Some social scientists have coined the term “wicked problems” to describe these challenges. However, as a former member of the APS, I know that public servants don't believe in wickedness. Instead, I suspect they are more comfortable with what we might call “systemic challenges”.
Challenges that might even call for courageous policies.
Whatever the label, these challenges often have these dimensions:
     * First, they emerge from external factors that are often global in scope.
     * Second, they require not just policy change from government and the public service but often behavioural change from the economy, society and individuals.
     * Third, these policies must be implemented comprehensively in complex and changing circumstances  -  so that policy implementation is seen as important as policy innovation.
     * Fourth, these challenges must be tackled under the full media spotlight.
     * Fifth, given the present economic crisis and the need for sustained fiscal discipline, they must be tackled in a context of constrained resources.
And to restate the theme of this conference, they require governments and public services to govern, manage and reform in times of crisis - what Allan Fels has called “high velocity environments.”
Such problems defy conventional approaches. They require new, collaborative approaches to policy making across departments, across Commonwealth, State, Territory and local governments. They often require partnerships with the private and community sectors. Increasingly, they also require us to work with governments abroad. Above all, they require innovative, urgent and practical policy thinking - great ideas, but also ideas grounded in the real world.
These are the profound challenges that face the Australian Public Service, but I believe the APS has the capacity to meet them. Based on what I have seen as Prime Minister and on what I know of Australian history, I have every confidence in the ability of the APS to address them.
Consider the challenges we have confronted since the global financial crisis escalated so dramatically one year ago this month.
Australia has weathered the global recession better than most other countries. Australia - unlike every other major advanced economy -  to date, has not fallen into a technical recession. In fact, Australia is the only advanced economy to have reported positive growth over the past year.
Part of Australia's resilience is due to the success of our policy response. We acted early and decisively across a range of policy levers to strengthen the banking system and support economic activity.  Australia was one of the first countries in the world to announce a bank guarantee. Australia rapidly implemented a comprehensive stimulus package that will save over 200,000 jobs over the next two years.
Overall the Government's response to the global economic crisis has so far been positive:
     * In terms of early problem diagnosis and management.
     * In terms of rapid and creative policy response.
     * And in the context of the enormous complexity of policy implementation, in a very short time frame.
On all three fronts, many challenges still lie ahead but so far the APS has performed well.
The Australian and many overseas governments worked together through the G20. Federal and State governments worked together; public sector agencies worked together; staff put in long hours; multiple challenges were managed simultaneously.
The threat of global financial institutions collapsing; credit markets failing; the private economy grinding to a halt - this has been a test of crisis management, and so far the APS has performed extraordinarily well.
When we needed to make decisions swiftly, the APS was able to deliver first-class advice within very short time frames, and when we needed to create a new structure of Commonwealth and State coordinators for the implementation of the Nation Building for Recovery programs, the APS delivered, although the rollout will continue to be challenging given its scope and urgency.
Their task was to work swiftly, work across boundaries, work together and make sure the job got done - and they are getting the job done. More than 30,000 infrastructure projects worth more than $20 billion have been approved. Construction work has begun at more than 5,000 schools, and we expect every Australian primary school to have new infrastructure by early 2011. Construction has begun on nearly 1,000 new community and defence homes, and we expect at least 15,000 homes to be built by the end of next year.
Through the work on the Nation Building plan, I have seen a public service filled with capable and committed individuals, able to perform under intense pressures.
The government I lead came to office committed to renewing the movement for reform while at the same time maintaining the continuity that is among the great strengths of the APS. We removed no department heads. There was no night of the long knives.
But we believed that over the preceding decade the critical lines between politics on the one hand, and the public service on the other, had become blurred, so we set out to restore them.
We made merit-based selection mandatory for most agency heads and statutory office holders. In conjunction with senior public servants, we held induction sessions for incoming ministerial staff on the roles and responsibilities of the public service.
We introduced a code of conduct for Ministerial staff that sets out standards of professionalism, integrity and behaviour, including in their relationships with public servants. We introduced tight guidelines for government advertising campaigns, so that no advertising campaign worth more than $250,000 can proceed without a report from the Auditor-General.
We have introduced legislation abolishing conclusive certificates under the Freedom of Information Act 1982 and the Archives Act 1983. We introduced a Register of Lobbyists to regulate contact between third party lobbyists and government representatives including ministers, staff, public servants and defence personnel.
Our Government 2.0 Taskforce is also looking at ways to use information technology to build a pro-disclosure culture within the Public Service.
These were the first steps in our plan to reinvigorate the Westminster tradition in an Australian setting, but the larger challenges still lies ahead, and that is to move forward with a vision to make the APS the best public service anywhere in the world.
I believe that is an entirely reasonable and achievable aspiration for the APS  -  if we take the right actions now.
To achieve that goal, I believe the APS must perform five tasks:
     * Provide high-quality, forward-looking and creative policy advice;
     * Deliver high-quality programs and services that put the citizen first;
     * Maintain a culture of honesty, impartiality and fairness, with a focus on retaining public trust;
     * Provide flexible, agile responses to changing realities and government priorities; and
     * Be effective and efficient in all its operations.
We have a strong APS, but much needs to be done to achieve these objectives.
Firstly, while the APS ranks highly in global terms for providing independent and impartial advice, we must ensure that this advice is also creative, innovative and outward looking. Public servants should not shy away from big ideas or be afraid to be bold. As I have said before, we cannot afford a culture where the public service only tells the government what it wants to hear.  
Over time, the APS has begun to create policy through taskforces and teams that are formed not from single divisions or departments but include policymakers from across government and from the private sector. In my Department, the new Strategy and Delivery Division is breaking new ground in creating teams of diverse policy officers to produce high-quality, collaborative, evidence-based work.
Nevertheless, the 2007-08 State of the Service Report showed that the APS is still far from having a culture of innovation. More than half of APS employees surveyed were ambivalent about whether new ideas were encouraged in their workplace. The vast majority said they were keen to try out new ideas but many felt they had limited support to take them forward. 
A second area in which the APS must renew its efforts is in the delivery of citizen-centred services. The relative success of Centrelink and Medicare in delivering frontline services focussed on the customer is testimony to how far the APS has come in this field, compared to 30 years ago, but we need to go further.
We need to create more customer-friendly services and make more services available through single locations, and not only does the APS need to know more about what  customers of public services want but it has to do more to feed that knowledge back to policymakers.
In 2007-08, only 54 per cent of APS employees thought their agency had good feedback mechanisms in place between the service delivery and policy development areas. 
Thirdly, there is a clear need for a stronger collective identity within the APS. In 2007-08 only 40 per cent of Senior Executive Service employees -- the leadership group  -  saw themselves as part of an APS leadership group rather than as leaders of their agency. What is more, if public servants are to see themselves as part of one APS, and if the APS is to be more flexible and agile, mobility rates across agencies must improve.
Only three per cent of APS employees moved between agencies in 2007-08, according to the State of the Service report. Movement between the APS and external employers is higher, but is still too low. There are still too many impediments and disincentives for employees moving between agencies, or between jurisdictions.
This kind of mobility must be encouraged to enrich the ability of individual public servants to provide cross-cutting advice, including on matters that transcend Commonwealth, State and Territory boundaries.
Finally, and critically, the APS must renew itself through investment in its greatest asset  -  its people. This is particularly urgent when the proportion of the APS workforce aged over 55 has doubled over the last 12 years, when more than 70 per cent of SES employees will be eligible for retirement over the next 10 years.
And when, as the Audit Office has pointed out, the APS faces a big challenge to attract and retain talented staff.
To overcome that challenge, the APS needs to invest more in developing the right people. Last year three-quarters of agencies that were able to estimate their expenditure on learning and development said they invested less than two per cent of their budgets in their people.
Of those, 39 per cent of agencies reported that they spent less than one per cent of their budget on learning and development, and in 2007-08, fewer than one in three APS employees rated the effectiveness of their learning and development as high or very high in terms of helping them to improve performance.
These figures are just not good enough for a professional public service.
I believe the next stage of renewal of the APS requires more than just piecemeal change. We need a more sweeping reform driven by a long-range blueprint for a world class, 21st century public service. That is why I am pleased to announce today that the Secretary of the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet, Terry Moran, will be establishing and leading an Advisory Group to develop a blueprint for reform of the public service.
The work of the Advisory Group will proceed in two parts.
First, the Group will oversee the completion of an international benchmarking exercise to compare Australian performance with leading bureaucracies around the world. That is because the APS needs to know and be honest about its current performance, so that it can understand how it can improve.
Second, the Advisory Group will use the benchmarking study, along with other inputs, to develop the blueprint for reform. As part of the development of the blueprint, the Advisory Group will seek the input of the APS, and the broader community, about the APS's future and possible reforms.
Before the end of this month Mr Moran will convene the Advisory Group and release a discussion paper seeking public and APS input.  When that happens I encourage you all to let the Advisory Group know what you think about the future of the APS.
By early next year the Group will advise the Cabinet Secretary and me on the further steps we need to take to rejuvenate the APS. The Group will consider reform of the internal structures of the APS to ensure it provides the best policy advice to government.
And importantly, it will assess the core challenge of how to strengthen service delivery and measurement, how to foster a greater sense of cohesion and esprit de corps across the APS, how to attract the best people from outside the public service, and how to make the most of the great talent inside the service.
A specific priority will be a renewed and major investment in education and development of staff, in order to build strategic leadership across the APS.
To enhance the capabilities of the APS and its future leaders, we will need a renewed focus on learning and development in the public service, and on building close relationships with experts across the community. This may mean forming new relationships with universities, industry or other non-government groups.
It may mean government working closely with existing institutions, or creating new institutions, to build public service capabilities.
As I said in my address to Burgmann College at the Australian National University last week, for too long in Australia, thick walls have existed between places of research and learning, and places of policy making and implementation. Those thick walls do not enhance either the quality of public administration or the quality of academia.
They are in stark contrast with the United States, where the flow of experts between government and academia sharpens expertise in both. The Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University exemplifies this approach. 
Formed in the 1930s on the back of the Great Depression, the Kennedy School is now a collection of eminent social science research institutions, comprised of 15 institutes and research centres and over 30 executive education and degree programs. Together, these institutions draw on the resources of the entire University to make the School a centre for training enlightened public leaders that attracts some of the best students from across the world. At its core, this approach is the aspiration of both the Crawford School here at the ANU, and ANZSOG across Australia and New Zealand.
That said, I believe it is time for us to think about how we can strengthen our approach here. We should aspire to building a uniquely local version of the Kennedy School's impact.
I am in the market for ways we can improve how public institutions relate here, so we make the most of the great talent we have in Australia, wherever that talent exists.
Like the approach of the Kennedy School, our arrangements must equip the future public service to excel at policy analysis and advice, as well as public sector leadership. They must also increase the depth of public policy knowledge on which we can draw to tackle the most challenging issues we face.
Any new relationships or institutions in Australia would need to recognise and build on the strengths of what already exists. The Crawford School of Economics and Government at ANU has already built an enviable reputation as a centre of public policy research excellence.
I'm proud that the Secretary of my Department, Terry Moran, is on the Advisory Council  -  this demonstrates the Australian Government's commitment to this endeavour.  It is clear that we have one of the foundation stones for an Australian version of the Kennedy approach in the Crawford School, and its network of research institutes such as the Australia-Japan Research Centre.
Importantly, Crawford has built extensive international networks and linkages that bring students from other parts of the world to Australia, and encourage greater Asia literacy and global understanding in the Australian public policy community  -  and we need to strengthen this role.
Another foundation stone for an Australian version of the Kennedy approach is ANZSOG. Through ANZSOG, Australia has built a unique public policy and public sector management institution with relevant and useful international linkages.
It recognises our close relationship with New Zealand, and it is a model uniquely adapted to the Australian federal system, bringing together a consortium of Governments and universities from around the country and across the Tasman. As a result, Australia finally has high quality public sector executive leadership training and development of a standard superior to most places in the world.
ANZSOG is showing that it is capable of delivering first rate training for future leaders on a sufficient scale to underpin an improvement of overall public sector capability.
The Australian National University is a critical part of the ANZSOG undertaking, and also a critical part of the life of our national capital. The ANU holds a special place as a strategic endowment for our nation.
The Australian Government's vision for the ANU is to build on this national endowment.
The ANU is a university of national and international significance in terms of its contribution to both policy development and analysis, and in terms of training future leaders. For this reason, I believe it is time to reinvigorate the Commonwealth's relationship with the ANU and create a new partnership between the public service, ANZSOG and the ANU. 
That relationship is, in my view, crucial to fostering the development of the next generation of public service leaders, and ensuring government draws on the wealth of expertise that exists across the ANU and ANZSOG networks.
Part of this could potentially entail the ANU hosting a much enhanced and upgraded ANZSOG presence through a new National Centre of Public Policy and Public Sector Management. This Centre would focus on professional development.
Public service executives could either access programs at the ANU, or at one of the other university members of ANZSOG closest to where they work. As part of this, the ANZSOG Executive Master of Public Administration would become a key preparation for a role at the level of Senior Executive Service Band One. Other ANZSOG programs could be tailored for those in more senior roles.
For the ANU itself, this would mean a renewed emphasis on tapping the broader academic base for contributions to public policy through a new internal think tank or by other means.
The Government's program of public service reform above all else is about our people, fostering a public service culture where there is a passion for public policy, people who recognise that there are few more important and rewarding professions that an Australian can follow than to forge public policy that will change and better the lives of all Australians.
Like all contemporary institutions, the Australian Public Service is challenged by the sometimes bewildering pace of complex change, but the challenge of change has been a continuing feature of life for successive generations stretching back to the Industrial Revolution.
A generation ago in 1976, the Coombs Commission noted - and I quote - that:
“changing social attitudes in our time and the increasing tempo of technological change are widening the range and intensifying the complexity of the functions performed by governments and presenting them with a different pattern of characteristic problems.''
Many generations before, in 1854, the Northcote-Trevelyan report had warned of:
“...the great and increasing accumulation of public business and the consequent pressure upon the Government...''
It added that without a professional public service, the business of the government of the day could not be carried on.
Today's public service values many of the features of the public service ethos established as a result of reforms more than 150 years ago, but it also embraces change. Indeed, what marks the history of the public service is the productive tension between continuity and change.
It is precisely those organisations with a strong sense of their stability and continuity  -  of the strength of their culture and their values  -  that are best placed to change. 
That, more than anything else, lies at the heart of my confidence that the Australian Public Service can aspire to be - and can be - the best public service in the world.


Thanks very much, and thank you very much, Mike, for those kind remarks before. Tony Kelly, the President of Brisbane Lions Football Club, Steve Kernighan, President of Carlton, Jeanne Pratt - where you, Jeanne? Just wonderful to have you here with us, and I share all those sentiments which have been expressed earlier this evening about Dick's contribution to the game, his great and continuing support for the Carlton Football Club, and we are all the poorer for his passing.And to you, the sponsors and friends and football fans one and all, welcome to my electorate. That's where you are, each and every one of you, you're in the Federal Division of Griffith and I'm greeting you as your Federal Member. And those of you who have come from interstate, those of you who have the unfortunate habit of being Carlton supporters, there is a local bylaw which is that if, perchance, you were to lose this evening, we intend to lock the place down. You will not escape.It's great to be back at the Gabba, it's great to be back home. One of the great delights in being the local member here is that I live about 15 minutes' walk that way, so in the last decade or so that I've been backing the Lions, it has been a great advantage to be able to walk to this ground, and to walk home, and it's been less of an advantage, however, to go out in the middle at the end of the game and try and kick a football around with my sons. That's led to general commentary from all those other dads who have been out on a ground with me doing that saying that I should stick to my day job, and they were absolutely right.What is terrific is to be back here tonight to see the Lions back where they belong, and that's playing football in the month of September. It's a fantastic thing to say. Five long years, not that any of us have been counting, since 2004. '01, '02, '03 weren't bad, '04 was pretty good, and it's great to be back.But it's also great to be back against a team such as Carlton, which has such an extraordinary history. You think of the history of the AFL, what would its history be without the likes of Carlton and Collingwood? They are so steeped in the game's past and so vital in the game's future.My (inaudible) in saying a few things here tonight is to do with the campaign which Mike referred to before, which we launched at the MCG only a couple of days ago, and I did so with Sam Mitchell from Hawthorne.Just think - here are three facts which I'd just like you to reflect on. The first is this: 70 percent of 15- to 17-year-olds have been exposed to alcohol-related violence - that's 70 percent. The second is this: three out of four assaults in our country are alcohol-related. The third one is this: three out of four street offences in our country are alcohol-related as well.This should all give us national pause for thought, and whether you're from Melbourne, whether you're from Sydney, whether you're from Bris like I am, or the other metropolitan centres of our country, there is a real problem out there which we've got to deal with, and it's alcohol-fuelled violence.Those of us who are parents, those of us who have got kids who are out on a Friday night and a Saturday night, your heart goes into your mouth these days in terms of what's going on out there. We've actually got to do better as a community in our response to it, and at multiple levels.One of those levels has been, I think, the extraordinary support given to us by the heroes and the leaders of the AFL, and that's why I was so proud to be there recently at the MCG, launching this 'Just Think' campaign. Very simply, it's this: no-one out there, including the captains of the teams, is saying to the young people of Australia 'don't drink.' What they are saying is 'just think.'What they are saying is it's fine to go out there when there's a big game on and to have a party and to celebrate with your mates and your friends. That's good, that's natural, that's an Australian thing to do, and all of us have been young and all of us have been out there and all of us have celebrated. But it also comes with a responsibility, which is to understand when you've got to draw the line, when you've got to stop, when you've got to just think.And that's what this campaign is all about, and when you see the ad which you'll see across our nation's television screens and in our papers and on radio, it's our eight AFL captains, including the Juddster, including Brownie, including a whole bunch of others, simply saying to the young people of Australia, young men in particular, that it's fine to go out there, it's fine to go out there and have a drink with your mates, but think about, just think about what happens if the next morning you're permanently confined to a wheelchair. Think about it if the next morning your mate is, frankly, impeded from ever speaking again. Think about it again if as a consequence of that big night out which just went too far, and too long, too hard, that they lose a limb through alcohol-related violence.And that's why it's such a great campaign, so I'd ask each and every one of you as supporters of this great code, in your own way, in your own part of Australia, in your own profession, get behind the campaign. See the ad, talk about it, talk about it to your friends and your colleagues, in particular your kids, because this is part and parcel of the challenge, getting inside the heads of our young people who we all know, because we've all been young once, they all believe, as we all did, that we are invincible and invulnerable - and we're not.That's what the campaign's all about.One final thing for me, and it goes to how much of my continued appreciation for what the AFL Players Association is doing, not just what goes on on the field, but what they are engaged in off the field. This thing here, which many of you are wearing on your lapels, causes us to remind ourselves of some of the excellent work that they are doing.A few nights ago in Melbourne, I spent some time with the Melbourne City Mission, and this is a group which looks after anywhere between 200 and 300 requests every week to find somewhere to stay for Melbourne's young homeless. 200-300 requests a week, trying to find somewhere for people to stay for a whole range of different reasons.One of the great things that the Players Association has done is dug deep and contributed to the building, construction and now the operation of a homeless centre for young people in Carlton, the suburb of Carlton in Melbourne. I think it's the suburb of Melbourne, thereabouts anyway.That, I think, is a very practical way in which the players of this great code stick their hands in their pocket and do something practical, and that sort of project should be commended.So from me, two big thank yous tonight, and both to the Players Association. One for getting behind this fantastic campaign, important campaign 'Just Think', and the second is to say thank you also for their practical work for young people who are doing it tough out there, and on any night of the week can't find a place to stay.So thank you to Carlton for being with us tonight. Don't go too well, and as your local member I can shut this suburb down.Enjoy the game, everyone.


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history, and as he is the subject of much of this book, let me also wish Mr Howard well for a full recovery after his recent time in hospital.
A couple of weeks ago I had the honour of launching the first volume of Tom Keneally's new history of Australia.  It covers a period stretching from the beginning of time through the origins of European settlement to Eureka  -  now that's about 40,000 years in 700 pages.
Now, Paul has also clocked up nearly 700 pages in this mighty tome, but managed to cover a mere 10 years - albeit 10 years of our more recent history.
So were we to apply the Kelly principle to the Keneally task, and were Paul to embark on a comprehensive national history, we would be anticipating a canon of some 22 volumes covering the period of European settlement alone, which in turn would make Manning Clark a mere writer of short stories.
Of course, one of the more frightening features of Paul's 22 volumes is that Paul would also have been present for most of the key events.
Paul has been writing defining political histories since before any of my staff were born.
From The Unmaking of Gough in the 1970s, to The Hawke Ascendancy in the early '80s and The End of Certainty in the early '90s, and that was after a career in the Prime Minister's Department in Canberra that began in the late '60s.
His achievement has of course been recognised by his peers, by the industry and in academic circles  -  his double Walkley in 2001; the Graham Perkin Journalist of the Year in 1990; the honorary doctorates from the University of Sydney, the University of NSW, and of course, he is also a Brownlow Medal winner and has been inducted into both the Australian Football Hall of Fame and the Australian Recording Industry Association Hall of Fame, although Lockie did say something about that being a different Paul Kelly.
Let me first congratulate Melbourne University Press, and the University of Melbourne, for this significant publishing achievement.
This is a stupendous piece of work.
Since The End of Certainty in 1994, there's been a sense of expectation about the next volume from Paul's pen.
End of Certainty, of course, is known for that one big idea - that the great structural reforms of Hawke and Keating in the 1980s had brought to an end an essentially bipartisan consensus which Paul described as 'the Australian Settlement':
     * industry protection;
     * state paternalism;
     * wage arbitration;
     * imperial benevolence, and
     * the White Australia Policy.
That concept of the Australian Settlement has become the reference point for capturing the breadth of the sweeping changes achieved by the reformist Labor administration of Hawke and Keating.
It's a tribute to Paul Kelly that this book was re-published last year, 14 years after its release.
Today, the long wait for the sequel to End of Certainty is over, and can I say, the news isn't all good  -  a conservative government gets elected and stays in office for a long time.
But don't let me spoil the book for you, except to say it has a good ending, though it takes a while to get there.
In this book, Paul argues in support of what he describes as an essentially bipartisan 'Australian Exceptionalism':
'a transformation from the pre-1983 protected economy of the old Australia settlement... faithful to Australian values of economic pragmatism, social egalitarianism and practical utility. It avoided the laissez-faire laxity of the American system and the stifling controls of the European system.' (p267)
This, I suspect, is where debate around March of Patriots will focus, and I expect the debate will be robust, and perhaps some of the participants in the Keating and Howard eras themselves might even be keen to chip in to that debate  -  particularly Mr Howard and probably a fair bet Paul Keating as well.  
I suspect Tony Jones and Leigh Sales have the next month of Lateline interviews already lined up. I'm actually looking forward to it.
If we break down Paul's core argument in March of Patriots into two parts, I think we find one element that is compelling, and one that is more contentious.
When Paul speaks of an Australian exceptionalism, he is touching on a much larger story that reaches back to Federation and further back into Australia's early foundations since the beginning of European settlement. As I said in launching Tom Keneally's new book, we often do not appreciate just how remarkable Australia's national story truly is.
For all our faults, the Australian story is indeed exceptional.
A nation that has carved an economy from an inhospitable earth to build one of the most prosperous on earth.
A nation that has so often led the world in social progress like rights for women and rights for working people - building one of the most open, most progressive, least class-based societies in the world.
A nation that from its beginnings has etched within its soul, in fact within its DNA, an almost inalienable sense of fairness - what we call in our own vernacular the 'fair go'.
A nation that time and again has shown itself open to extraordinary adaptation and change  -  moving in less than a generation from a White Australia Policy to embracing the diversity of the cultures that now contribute to our national identity.
A country and community confident of its place in the region and in the world  -  straddling uniquely the challenges and complexities of our Indigenous antiquity, our European history and our Asian geography.
Within that context, Paul rightly highlights the extraordinary achievement of economic modernisation in the '80s and '90s alongside our commitment to the fair go - 'an Australian-made synthesis of a decent society and a strong economy' (p2).
And the reform debate in this nation has often been more far reaching across the full span of economic and social policy, than in the UK where it has focused primarily on public services, and the US on individual policy areas like health reform. Our has been a broader canvas for debate and the breadth of the canvas itself is something exceptional.
The second part of Paul's core argument is how this achievement comes about during the past quarter century.  Paul attributes it to what is essentially a bipartisan consensus.
Within that argument, Paul notes that:
'The origins of the economic model that defined Australia's long expansion from 1991 to 2008 belong with Hawke and Keating. John Howard did not create the model; he adapted the model. 
Its creation lay with Hawke and Keating in the post-1983 reform era and this creation is one of Labor's epic monuments. The Labor foundations were the float, financial deregulation and tariff reductions.  Upon this, Labor built a central bank that started to target inflation, competition policy and privatisation, enterprise bargaining and a long-run fiscal trajectory to return to surplus.' (p266)
'...Labor's policy contribution over 1983-96 was distinctly more dynamic and substantial but the Liberal contribution over 1996-2007 was important and path-breaking in changing conservative ideology.' (p267)
As Paul goes on to note:
'In its last term the Howard Government was tired, short on ideas and beguiled into soft options by the post-2003 China boom and the income surge it delivered Australia... Howard's most serious economic failure [was] his refusal to maximise the boom year revenues in the cause of long-run reform and productivity gains.' (p268, 276)
This is not a minor critique. Productivity is, more than anything else, the basis of a nation's prosperity. As Paul Krugman says, and as I've often quoted  -  productivity is not everything, but in the long run it's almost everything.
The Liberals' failure to advance a framework for increasing national productivity is not a minor blemish on their economic record. It reflects a fundamental failure of long-term economic reform and casts legitimate doubt over the extent to which the Liberal Party can be regarded as partners with Labor in the great project of economic modernisation for Australia.
And indeed, Paul alludes to specific aspects of this failure:
'Howard had failed to value sufficiently investment in education and in human capital; he had been too slow in responding to global warming and too reluctant to better coordinate infrastructure investment.' (p4)
Again, these were not matters of minor oversight.
Further, Paul's narrative confirms that the economic policy outcomes of the earlier Howard years were largely in place already in the final term of the Keating Government  -  such as with the transition to inflation targeting and the independence of the Reserve Bank from 1993 (p109), which was formalised in the Accord in 1995 (p120).
Mr Howard did not even agree with major elements of the micro reform agenda from which he subsequently reaped great benefits  -  like the National Competition Policy reforms that came into effect from 1995  -  as is revealed in Arthur Sinodinis's remark to Graeme Samuel in 2003 (p124).
As Paul says, Mr Howard chose a 'golden moment to ascend' to Government in 1996, with the economy set up for a long period of growth with low inflation locked in, and the economy in the middle of the greatest period of productivity growth on record.
By contrast, when Labor came to office in 2007, we inherited rising inflation and productivity levels that had been in decline for a decade.
This was to be followed by the worst global recession in three quarters of a century, existential threats to financial systems around the world; rising unemployment and severe fiscal constraints for all governments ahead.
To this should be added climate change which had been left unaddressed over the previous decade, and the need to effect a fundamental transformation to a low carbon economy.
But governments are judged, and will be judged, not on the circumstances they inherit, nor the adversity they confront, but on the decisions they make, and that will be true of this Government as well.
We would argue that Labor has always approached economic and social reform differently to our opponents.
Labor has consistently understood that prosecuting an economic reform agenda without a social reform agenda dooms both to failure.
Fundamentally, Labor has always rejected the view that President Obama described in his acceptance speech at the Democratic National Convention last year, a view that people should somehow:
'Pull yourself up by your own bootstraps, even if you don't have boots. You are on your own.'
By contrast, the nation-building Labor reforms of the '80s and '90s reflect a deep understanding of the social contract between governments and citizens, in which a government undertakes difficult structural changes while doing whatever is possible to look after working people while those changes are underway.
That has meant specifically targeting assistance to those Australians most disadvantaged from the reform process, such as when Labor phased out of tariff protection in the 1990s, when Labor implemented the structural adjustment programs specifically targeted to help those who would lose jobs in manufacturing through payouts, re-skilling and transition to other work opportunities.
It is true that there are many social reforms that have endured through long periods of Liberal rule, but this is not because our opponents believed in them. This is because these reforms had become so widely accepted as part of the Australian way of life that it became too difficult to uproot them - but try they did.
Consider, for example: Medicare; universal superannuation; the HECS system to provide equitable access while making the expansion of tertiary education sustainable; and the provision of fairness in the workplace through a decent safety net.
These are reforms that have defined Australia as a fairer society than other western democracies like the United States.
The Liberals sought to undermine each of those reforms  -  with cuts to public hospital funding, opposition to the Superannuation Guarantee; the creation of full-fee student places, and of course, with Work Choices.
The fact that these reforms proved resilient to their attacks is a Labor achievement, not a matter of bipartisan consensus. Further, many fundamental social and economic reforms that are now regarded as part of what might be called the 'Australian contract' have been achieved not because of bipartisan support, but despite conservative opposition.
The Liberal Party opposed Medicare.
It opposed targeted welfare reforms, like the assets test that helped make our age pension system sustainable.
It opposed the crackdown on tax loopholes in the 1980s.
It opposed the 1993 reforms to establish a workplace relations system based on enterprise bargaining.
The great social reforms of the Hawke and Keating era were critically important to sustaining public support for the difficult work of modernising our economy to make it more competitive in a rapidly globalising world. 
This in fact was (and remains) the great Australian contract.
It is the only way to bring the country and community with us if we are going to be able to deliver the continuing program of economic reform that is necessary for Australia to carve out its future in a harsh and forbidding world.
This is what Paul has described in the past as hard heads and soft hearts  -  a phrase I have often borrowed to describe our course for the future, whether in microeconomic reform, Indigenous policy in the Territory, or a mandatory transparent public reporting agenda for our nation's schools.
But Paul, I fear we may part company on the question of whether this contract is actually shared between the two dominant traditions of Australian politics, for on the economic reform agenda, we would describe our opponents as indolent  -  perhaps not always opposing the great transformational reforms engineered by Labor during its 13 years in office, but barely adding to that reform agenda during their 12 years office.
Opportunity squandered, rather than opportunity seized when public revenue was awash with the proceeds of a global resources boom.
And on social reform, again we find it hard to construct an argument for consensus following a decade riven with the orchestrated politics of asylum seekers, Hansonism and a refusal to embrace the term 'multiculturalism' for most of our opponents' time in office.
Which brings me to one final point for debate in a book which is obviously designed to provoke a bucket load of debate. Paul says 'neo-liberalism' died in the Liberal Party in 1993 with the death of Fightback!.
He argues this on the basis of his definition of neo-liberalism as 'big bang reform'.
Neo-liberalism is more than the dimensions of a political project  -  it is the ideological content of that project, and for neo-liberals, that project is clear-cut: it is the theory of self-regulating or self-correcting markets and of an ideal role for government which is shackled in its role as market regulator, as well as restricted in the provision of public goods.
For our political opponents, that ideology did not die with Fightback. We see it as alive and well more than 15 years later.
We have seen it in workplace relations where Work Choices effectively saw labour as no different to any other commodity to be traded on a free, barely regulated market at the lowest market price.
We have seen it in climate change  -  described as the greatest market failure in economic history  -  where the Liberal Party refused to act, because its majority believed that somehow the problem would solve itself absent the state intervening to regulate for a market to set a carbon price.
We have seen it not only on global financial markets in the lead-up to the global financial crisis, but also nationally when despite multiple recommendations, our predecessors refused to implement a deposit insurance scheme because they were captive to the banking industry's argument that statutory protections for consumers in our financial system were unnecessary.
And in the fiscal response to the crisis, we see the same ideology at play which argues against fiscal stimulus to cushion the impact of the global recession  -  presumably because of a belief that the macroeconomy is best left to correct itself.
Of course, technically it may be able to correct itself  -  so long as you are prepared to accept hundreds of thousands of Australians as collateral damage as a consequence of a 'market correction'.
This, of course, is not the Australian Government's view, nor is it the view of the 20 largest economies around the world wrestling with the current crisis through the G20.
There is, therefore, in our view, on the Labor side of politics, a continuing ideological common denominator to much of the policy behaviour of our opponents: a form of free market fundamentalism which has little in common with the philosophy and policy of the reforming centre of Australian politics to which we belong.
Of course the challenge for us now is to apply the tradition of the reforming centre that has served us so well in the past, to the great challenges that lie in the future.
On the economy, Australia has so far emerged better than most through the global economic recession, with stronger growth, the second strongest employment, the lowest debt and the lowest deficit of all the major advanced economies, and the only one to have thus far avoided technical recession.
But the challenge now is not to yield to complacency but to seize the great global opportunity that now presents itself to the nation, to build on the global competitive advantages of the Australian economy and to consolidate with an all-embracing program of microeconomic reform to boost productivity growth for the long term:
     * A quality and quantity education revolution.
     * Productivity-enhancing infrastructure investment by both the public and private sectors.
     * A communications revolution by breaking the power of monopoly and rolling out one of the greatest productivity enhancing investments possible through a national broadband network.
     * The creation of a seamless national economy, collapsing 27 sets of conflicting regulations into a streamlined set of uniform rules.
     * Maximising our global competitiveness through targeted tax reform.
All measures designed to make Australia the best economy to trade with, invest in and do business with.
And all throughout, making the necessary long-term social reforms in such areas such as health, aged care, retirement incomes policy and the environment to continue bringing the broader Australian community with us on the great national reform program that lies ahead, a program that is necessary to secure our nation's future in a tough, competitive and unsentimental world.
History will be the judge on whether we succeed or fail, but our ambition from the start is to make a fundamental difference - not to be here for the sake of being here, but indeed to be a government of hard heads and soft hearts.
So with those reflections on Paul's considerable achievement, and my wide extrapolations from them, let me again congratulate Louise Adler and the team at MUP, and congratulate Paul once again for this historically important contribution to Australian political debate.
This is a monumental account that will become a benchmark for future research on this period of Australian history, and it provides perspective that could only come about through Paul's proximity to those in power through this period.
Whatever perspective people take, this book will no doubt help shape that debate for a long time to come.
It is an honour to launch March of Patriots.
Let the debate begin.


What a momentous day it is for the Australian Federal Police, and the Australian community as a whole, to welcome a new Commissioner.
It is a big year for the AFP given that October 2009 also marks the 30th Anniversary of the organisation.
What is sometimes forgotten is that the catalyst for the incorporation of the ACT and the Commonwealth Police in 1979 was an act of terrorism here on Australian soil.
The bomb that exploded at the Sydney Hilton Hotel during the Commonwealth Heads of Government Regional Meeting in February 1978 killed three people and injured eight.
It led to a review of Australia's ability to deal with terrorism at a national level.
A former head of Scotland Yard, Sir Robert Mark, chaired the inquiry and found our Commonwealth and State police system 'hopelessly outmoded'.
Tony Negus takes the reins of an organisation that I doubt Robert Mark would recognise but I'm sure would approve of.
I am advised that a police officer on the beat today carries between 8 and 10 kilos of gear on their accoutrement belt, and that mirrors the AFP's development over the past 30 years.
As the challenges that the organisation faces have changed, so have the tools needed to fight them.
The AFP that Tony Negus takes over is a highly skilled, highly professional and highly strategic outfit that recognises the importance of its role nationally and globally.
It is an organisation that works hand in hand with government to secure the future of Australia.
I know the Attorney-General and Minister for Home Affairs both greatly appreciate the strong partnership they have forged with the AFP. They are both thankful for the strategic and considered advice that they receive from their AFP colleagues.
The AFP has been in existence for 30 years - and Tony Negus has been with it for 27 of them. I'm sure the AFP you joined in 1982, Tony, is unrecognisable from the one that you are part of today.
Back then the AFP was only just coming to grips with its first mainframe computer, and I'm guessing when Tony was with Traffic Operations he wrote one or two accident reports on an old Olivetti - carbon paper and Tippex at the ready, and if there are children in the room you may have to explain all that to them.
But today's AFP leads the way in hi-tech crime fighting, which I know is an area Tony has a particular interest in.
The AFP also partners with the private sector to prevent crimes that were not even imagined in 1982.
Crimes that threaten us as individuals, as institutions and as a nation.
This is not Robert Peel's 1829 era of the newly established London constabulary, where the bobbies were responsible for not only preventing crime but for lighting lamps and telling the community that it's 'two o'clock and all is well'.
When Mick Palmer was about to pass the Commissioner's mantle to Mick Keelty in 2001, he said:
'Law enforcement, as is the case with other professions, is in a constant state of change. New commissioners and governments redefine the role they see for their police service in an endeavour to provide best practice to the communities they serve. No one aspires to be a police commissioner simply to maintain the status quo.'
Tony's challenge as Commissioner will be to keep the AFP moving forward while maintaining Australia's status quo as a peaceful and secure nation in rapidly changing times.
We only have to look at the past eight years of Mick Keelty's time in the role to see that 'standing still' was not an option - September 1, the Bali, Madrid and London bombings, the South-East Asian tsunami.
Mick leaves the AFP a great legacy, and the tributes to his leadership have been well documented since his decision to step down, but I will just say that not only has his leadership impacted on the domestic policing scene - his contribution to law enforcement in the region should be a source of great pride.
The AFP, under Mick's leadership, has also become not only a national but a world leader in drug investigation.
I'll just give you an idea of the magnitude of the change that Mick has overseen in that aspect of the job.
In his first year as Commissioner, Mick led an operation that saw the biggest ecstasy haul in Australia's history to that date. Operation Affcott netted 150 kilos of pills.
Last year, the AFP's Operation Inca netted 4.4 tonnes of pills.
It was the world's largest seizure of ecstasy and signalled the sophistication and sheer size of the international drug trade - another challenge for Tony's AFP.
21st century policing is part Neighbourhood Watch, part national security and part international peacekeeping. We live in a complex, interconnected world that sometimes moves at a frightening pace.
I said in my first National Security Statement last December that terrorism and serious and organised crime are key matters for consideration in our national security planning.
The AFP works hand-in-hand with the Commonwealth and State and Territory governments through the National Counter-Terrorism Committee, which coordinates a nationwide response to the threat and consequence of terrorism.
The AFP is working with its national and international security and law enforcement partners to share intelligence and invest in measures to prevent terrorism at the grassroots level - tasks made even more difficult when you consider that the Internet with its reach and ease of access is one of the greatest propaganda tools of terrorist organisations as they seek out the marginalised in western societies.
But it is naive to believe that terrorism is the only threat to our national security.
Identity theft, pandemics, cyber crime, people trafficking, man-made and natural threats to our critical infrastructure, and the emerging problems associated with climate change are just some of the diverse tasks facing Tony Negus and his organisation.
Policing is a central component of national security. Effective future policing will increasingly require whole of government and cross -jurisdictional strategies to respond to crime.
The AFP will have to further its capacity to act together domestically through cross-agency and cross-jurisdictional task forces.
The organisation will need to continue to strengthen its partnerships with the private sector.
It will have to continue to enhance its effective bilateral, regional and multilateral cooperation with international law enforcement agencies.
And high quality and networked intelligence must continue to be shared between investigative agencies - internationally and domestically.
But the key to the AFP responding to the challenges of the emerging environment is the professionalism and flexibility of its people. Those attributes that have been a trademark of this organisation will hold it in good stead as it builds its organisational resilience to withstand the domestic and international winds of change.
Tony Negus knows this organisation inside and out. He has already proved his commitment to recruiting the best officers and personnel available.
Tony wants more sworn officers back in frontline investigations. He believes investigation is the core of this police force and regardless of future challenges he wants that core to remain strong. He has recognised the way the world is heading and is passionate about further developing the AFP's hi-tech crime capability.
Tony Negus is a man for the time.
The role of Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police is both a privilege and a burden, but it is a burden that Tony Negus and his predecessors accept with pride, because it brings with it the satisfaction of knowing they lead an organisation that can make a real difference to the quality of the life of Australians.
Australia has great confidence Tony, that you have the experience, the wisdom, the integrity and the insight to lead the Australian Federal Police and meet the challenges of policing in the 21st Century.
Congratulations and on behalf of the Australian Government and the Australian people I wish you the very best as you assume the role of Commissioner.
I would now like to invite Tony and Acting Chief Justice Spender to the stage for the official swearing in of the new Commissioner.


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
This is very much our welcome to country. And to our friends from Vietnam, I say the following: [In Vietnamese: welcome, General Secretary Manh, to Australia].
This is my attempt to welcome our guests in Vietnamese to Australia.
General Secretary, you are a welcome guest in our country.
Your nation too is one of ancient cultures. Vietnam has a proud and distinct history that stretches back across the millennia.
Your history has had its times of challenge.
But the people of Vietnam have triumphed over the centuries.
And they have established the modern, independent nation that you represent today.
On behalf of the Government of Australia, I want to say that we recognise the achievements of your nation and your people.
It is now more than 36 years since Australia and Vietnam established diplomatic relations.
Under our former Prime Minister Gough Whitlam, the then Australian Government took the lead among Western nations in establishing our official relationship.
It was a wise move.
It was a welcome move.
And history has shown that it was the right move.
Over the past 36 years the ties between our two nations have grown remarkably.
Our two nations and the world have changed a lot in those intervening years.
The Cold War has finished.
Globalisation has reached never before seen heights.
In our own region, the Asia-Pacific region, we have seen stability and great prosperity.
Throughout the region, hundreds of millions of people have been lifted out of poverty as each nation has developed and, in doing so, spurred the development of other nations in the region.
Vietnam's own economic development has been one of the great success stories of the past decade.
The percentage of people living in poverty has fallen from nearly 60 per cent to less than 15 per cent in only 15 years.
With a greater embrace of the international market place, Vietnam's economy has been transformed.
I recognise Mr General Secretary your role in helping to drive these reforms.
I am also pleased that Australia has been able to play a part in Vietnam's economic development.
Through our overseas development assistance, we partner with the government and the people of Vietnam to help build a better future.
Our assistance is targeted towards supporting Vietnam's engagement with the global economy, building infrastructure, improving water and sanitation, building capacity in the public and private sectors, and working together on the response to climate change.
These are all long-term challenges.
But they are challenges that are critical to the future Vietnam, and critical, also, to the future of Australia. We are pleased that we are partnering with you in these critical challenges of the future.
I would also like to acknowledge the important role played by the Vietnamese community in Australia, in its contribution to Australia's economy and the richness of our multicultural society, and in its contribution to the relationship between our two nations.
Today, our meeting has, I believe, set the course for the relationship between our countries for the period ahead.
We have issued a Joint Statement and we have witnessed the signing of the Comprehensive Partnership.
These documents provide a clear framework for the future development of this important relationship.
They outline the shared challenges we will face.
And they commit us to working even more closely together in our response to these challenges.
Our discussions today, General Secretary, covered areas from political visits to cooperation in security and defence. Also, furthering and deepening our economic relationship, trade, investment, and of course, expanding our education ties.
I believe we have a rich agenda ahead of us, for the future.
In the years ahead, I look forward to working with you and the government and people of Vietnam to realise the aspirations in those documents, and to realise the full potential of our relationship.
The relationship between Australia and Vietnam is not just a bilateral matter.
We are both important countries in the Asia-Pacific region.
We are both committed to making a strong contribution to the stability and prosperity of our region.
I look forward to continuing our discussions on the future of our region.
How we shape the future of our region in 2020 and beyond is a question that we have to begin to address now.
I thank Vietnam for its support for the ongoing discussions about an Asia-Pacific community.
Your support is a clear reflection of the shared interests we have in making the 21st century - the century of the Asia Pacific - a truly Pacific, or peaceful, century.
There is also history to our relationship that pre-dates the establishment of formal diplomatic ties.
We acknowledge the impact of Vietnam War had on Vietnam; we acknowledge the impact of that war on the people of Vietnam, and on the landscape of Vietnam.
Australia is a committed partner in helping heal those wounds.
Just as we are committed to healing the wounds of those from Australia who served.
On behalf of the Australian Government, I want to thank the government and the people of Vietnam for the support that we have received in locating and repatriating the last two Australians who were unaccounted for from the Vietnam War.
Flying Officer Michael Herbert and Pilot Officer Robert Carver were repatriated just last week - the last two Australians to return home.
Australia is committed to assisting Vietnam with its search for its own officers missing in action. This is a humane thing to do, and I express my appreciation to the government in Hanoi to the great assistance they've given us in this most sensitive of tasks.
Our relationship now is about the future.
And to build that shared future, I am a strong believer in the importance of education.
I am pleased that Australia is a leading education destination for Vietnamese students.
So far this year there have been more than 20,000 enrolments in Australian courses, and around 17,000 students studying in Australia.
Vietnamese students are welcome guests in our nation.
And we are committed to ensuring that they have a positive and rewarding experience on every level - educational, social and cultural.
The Australian Government is supporting this with concrete action.
Australia is also the leading provider of scholarships to Vietnamese students.
I am very pleased that we can make this contribution to equipping students with the skills and knowledge to drive the change that Vietnam needs for its future.
So far, the number of scholarships offered by the Australian Government to Vietnam has been increased to 175, up 25 since this Government assumed office. I was pleased to inform the General Secretary today that we'll increase that by a further 50 scholarships, from next year. In other words, since our Government assumed office, there has been an increase in the number of scholarships offered to Vietnam by 50%.
I regard this as a practical and positive measure to underline this operation between our two countries. And to underline the absolute importance of education.
General Secretary Manh, yours is the first visit by a General Secretary since Prime Minister Paul Keating welcomed General Secretary Doc Moi in 1995.
Both our nations have changed a great deal in those nearly 15 years.
And one of the great changes has been the growing strength and the real sense of shared interests between our two nations.
With your visit, we can begin a new phase in the relationship.
We can bring new depth and focus to our relationship.
Your visit is providing us with the catalyst to do that.
And I share your commitment to building on the strength of what we already have.
Mr General Secretary, you are a genuine friend, a genuine welcome guest in our country.
I wish you all the best for your visit here in Australia. I look forward very much to seeing you in Vietnam, at a time which suits both of our calendars, for the future.
I celebrate the relationship between us. I look forward to it attaining new heights in the future.
I thank you.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
It is truly moving to see so many people here tonight to support the White Ribbon Foundation, to support its message of zero tolerance for violence against women, to support the need for men to take responsibility for ending violence against women, And to support the actions of this Foundation and the Australian Government as we work together to stop violence against women.
Tonight is far from a celebration.
A cause for celebration would be if this was the very last White Tie dinner, If domestic violence or sexual assault were a thing of the past and the White Ribbon Foundation was no longer needed.
Sadly, that is not the case.
Every day, 1,000 women are violently assaulted across Australia on average.
That is 1,000 today, 1,000 tomorrow, and another 1,000 on Saturday.
Nearly half a million women in any one year.
That is a truly horrific statistic.
Over their lifetimes, almost one in five Australian women will be sexually assaulted. Almost one in three will be physically assaulted. Almost one in four children in Australia will witness violence against their mother or stepmother. Less than one-third of the victims will report it.
As I said at this dinner a year ago, this violence prefers the darkness. It prefers the silence. If we take no action, if we continue to let the darkness and the silence flourish, an estimated 750,000 Australian women will report being a victim of violence in 2021-22.
The cost of violence against women and their children to the Australian economy was estimated to be $13.6 billion last financial year, and if we take no action to shine a light on this violence, that cost will hit an estimated $15.6 billion by 2021-22.
Violence against women is always wrong.
It is never right.
And all men, deep in their hearts, know this.
All women, deep in their hearts, know this too.
Yet to stop violence from happening, we need men to acknowledge publicly what they know privately - that there is never any excuse for domestic violence or sexual assault.
There is no easy solution to this.
It will require change over a generation, possibly more - a cultural shift in the attitude of every Australian which starts with taking responsibility.
A 'head-in-the-sand' attitude towards domestic violence is an insult to every woman or child who has ever known the pain and fear of domestic violence.
Silence is tantamount to tacit approval.
This is the powerful statement of the White Ribbon Foundation, and of White Ribbon Day - that we cannot afford to be silent.
That we have a responsibility to speak up and say:
I swear never to commit violence against a woman.
I swear never to excuse violence against women.
And I swear never to remain silent about violence against women.
This is my oath.
We have to take responsibility, and together, we have to take action.
Responsibility and action - this is the basis of this Australian Government's approach to addressing the scourge of violence against women in our communities.
Previous Governments have taken important steps - increased reporting, law reform and greater community awareness build a platform for further action.
The fact that we are all here tonight demonstrates, though, that we must continue to act, and there is still much to be done.
Domestic violence and sexual assault can and does affect all of us.
Many people mistakenly believe that domestic violence is confined to certain socio-economic, cultural or age groups. It is not. It is happening to our neighbours, our sisters, our mothers, our friends, to our work colleagues.
Violence against women is unacceptable. We must have a zero tolerance attitude.
But an attitude is not enough - we have to take responsibility, as community leaders, as members of our community and as Australian men, and we have to take action.
The Australian Government has begun to take steps which I introduced last year, and I am pleased to report we are now well underway.
This won't happen overnight, it won't solve the whole problem, but it is one that is right, and one that takes both responsibility and action very seriously.
Violence against women is an old problem, but that doesn't mean it's an insoluble problem.
Take smoking. In the 1940s, more than half of all Australian men smoked, but with sustained Quit campaigns and education, increased taxes, and other measures like banning smoking in workplaces and restaurants, we've cut the smoking rate to less than 20 per cent.
That's the third-lowest in the world, and we've saved an estimated 750,000 lives in the process.
The Government's National Plan will be designed to have a radical, long-term effect on the rates of violence against women.
We need to discover what works.
We do not want to just raise awareness. We want to change behaviour, and we have to change that behaviour in every lounge room and kitchen, in every school and workplace, in every pub and sporting club - wherever violence occurs and wherever it is condoned.
The Australian Government is developing a National Plan to Reduce Violence against Women. We began by seeking expert advice from the National Council to Reduce Violence against Women and Their Children, in the form of their National Plan, the Time for Action Report.
We took immediate action in response to this report, in the form of a $42 million investment in the urgent actions identified by the Council, and we have taken the Time for Action report to COAG, to ensure that all levels of Government - State, Territory, Local and Federal - are working together to achieve real results.
Governments of both persuasions, at State and Federal levels, have taken important actions in the past, but they have not been able to solve the problem.
We are developing a national plan - involving all governments, involving the community, involving Australian men, and we are determined to get the National Plan to Reduce Violence against Women right the first time.
Time for Action recommends that:
     * Communities are safe and free from violence;
     * Relationships are respectful;
     * Services meet the needs of women and their children;
     * Responses are just;
     * Perpetrators stop their violence; and
     * Systems work together effectively.
This means that our community leaders, education systems, emergency housing, health, police, justice and family support services will all need to be involved.
We launched Time for Action at Narrabundah College, a senior school in Canberra where the students are participating in the Respectful Relationships program. This program works with young people - like the 16 and 17 year olds at Narrabundah College - to:
     * raise their personal awareness of ethical behaviour;
     * to develop protective behaviours; and
     * to develop their skills in building and sustaining respectful non-violent relationships.
The program involves secondary school students at four Canberra schools, as well as training for their teachers, with a $750,000 investment from the Australian Government, the Royal Women's Hospital's Centre against Sexual Assault in Melbourne will work with a local partner, the Canberra Rape Crisis Centre, to build a customised program.
Around 700 students (from years 10 through to 12) and 50 teachers will be involved in the program in Canberra over the three years. That is 700 students who have an opportunity to begin to change our attitudes, to change our society, in relation to violence in personal relationships, 700 young people who will be equipped with the skills to build into their relationships, their families and their communities, values of respect, with an understanding of ethical ways to treat others, especially those who you love, those who you choose to spend your lives with as friends, partners, husbands or wives.
I want to take the opportunity tonight to again thank the Council for their dedicated work in preparing the Time for Action report. Chair Libby Lloyd and Council Member Andrew O'Keefe are with us here tonight.
Their report has given us a firm evidence base from which to build a solid framework, and a vision to aspire to.
A vision for Australia where 'women and their children live free from violence, within respectful relationships, and in safe communities.'
It directs Government to solutions - not easy ones, but sustainable ones, and now the Council passes the baton to Government to take responsibility and to take action.
The Council's report, however, makes clear that in planning our next steps, in taking action, we can't presume that there is a one-size fits all approach. We know there isn't.
Time for Action says:
"... Action on multiple levels - individual, relationship, community, and societal - is more likely to be successful in tackling ... violence against women and their children, than ad-hoc, generalised solutions."
I couldn't agree more. I said before the election that it's time to end the blame game between the Commonwealth and the States.
I said when I launched the Council's report that:
"... It's hard to get a coordinated government effort that could help to make real progress."
And I said that:
"That's about to change. As Prime Minister, I'm determined to lead that change."
The Australian Government will take responsibility and will take action, by developing through COAG and for launch in 2010, an approach that's different.
Never before has violence against women been responded to with all of our systems and services working together. The National Plan to Reduce Violence against Women will set out a plan of action, so we can get on with the job - the very difficult job - of making a difference.
As I've said on everything from health reform to education to national security, we have to stop the blame game between governments in this country. If you have a national problem then you need a truly national solution.
That is why the Council of Australian Governments is instrumental in getting the Commonwealth, State and Territory governments on the same page with this, and just as this is not the sole responsibility of one government, or of one portfolio.
This is not just a women's matter. This is not a just a legal matter. This is not just a policing matter. This is a complex whole-of-government mission.
To this end, COAG has pulled all the threads together in a special Ministerial forum chaired by Tanya Plibersek. The forum includes Attorneys-General as well as a cross section of Ministers drawn from State and Territory government women's, health, justice, policing, and community service sectors.
This is the group that has been tasked with putting together the framework for our National Plan, and getting it right.
The Ministerial forum will examine all the evidence. The forum will consider what can be done immediately and what will take time to get right. It will look at how to build on current successes and create new ones. And it will develop a series of action plans for the short term, the medium term and the long term.
The Ministerial forum will release the National Plan to Reduce Violence Against Women in 2010, and this will be a long-term strategy to 2021.
We are also immediately investing $9.1 million over five years to test and evaluate Respectful Relationships programs, like the one running at Narrabundah College.
Six programs are being implemented in 50 sites across Australia in Round 1 of this initiative.
One of those initiatives is the Sex and Ethics program. It will target under-16 and under-18 rugby league squads in Queensland to start a grass roots attitudinal change in the sport.
I know that White Ribbon Ambassador and NRL CEO David Gallop will join me in applauding this initiative - one that helps to get rugby league off the front page and back to the sports page where it belongs.
Another initiative, the Keeping Safe program, is being implemented in more than 50 schools in the Northern Territory. That program aims to increase young people's capacity to negotiate ethical relationships, identify dangerous behaviour and put in place protective strategies.
I am pleased to announce that the Government has now opened Round 2 applications for the Respectful Relationships Program, at a total cost of $1.1 million. Ads for those applications will appear in papers nationally this Saturday.
This means an additional 2,000 young people are expected to be educated through this round - bringing the total to 8,000 throughout the duration of the program.
We will continue to work with the States and Territories, through COAG, to introduce respectful relationships education in more high schools across Australia.
We are also progressing the Council's immediate action recommendation in relation to an improved telephone helpline service.
The Government is investing $12.5 million in the 24 hour, 7 day a week telephone and online crisis service which is being developed in consultation with the States and Territories. It will be run by professional staff who can make referrals to follow up services, and it will also provide support for counsellors in remote and rural areas.
Last month the Minister, Tanya Plibersek, called for eligible organisations to submit an Expression of Interest to establish the new domestic violence and sexual assault Helpline. The Helpline will be up and running from 1 December this year.
And we are continuing to engage, to seek advice, in the development of this National Plan, through the adoption of another Immediate Action: to create the Violence Against Women Advisory Group.
It gives me great pleasure tonight to announce that the membership of the Advisory Group has been finalised. The group incorporates a wealth of expertise - from each State and Territory - in the disability, cross-cultural, education, policing, media and legal/judicial sectors.
I am also very pleased to see that three members of the National Council have agreed to continue to work with the Group. Libby Lloyd, Heather Nancarrow and Vanessa Swan will share the knowledge they gained over their 12 months with the National Council and I thank them for their vital support.
And Libby and Heather have agreed to continue their important roles as Chair and Deputy Chair of the new Advisory Group.
This will provide the continuity, leadership and direction to drive development of the National Plan. Continuity in thinking, in research is critical to continuing to build our evidence base and develop a plan to take forward.
Libby, Heather and Vanessa will be joined on the new Advisory Council by:
     * Annie Parkinson from New South Wales, the current President and a longstanding member of Women with Disabilities Australia,
     * Bess Price from the NT, who brings with her a wealth of experience in cross cultural awareness training, as a community liaison and in Warlpiri language services.
     * Mick van Heythuysen OAM, also from the NT, a former Superintendent in the NT Police Service who has worked in the remote communities and is a former winner of the Police Officer of Year award.
     * Dr Rae Kaspiew from Victoria, who specialises in research and legal policy analysis in the areas of family law and family violence.
     * Victoria Hovane from Broome in the Kimberley region of WA who holds a First Class Honours degree in Psychology and is part way through PhD in Forensic Psychology examining child sexual abuse in Aboriginal communities.
     * Georgie Gardiner from New South Wales, works with Channel Nine's TODAY show and is a strong advocate for a wide range social issues, particularly those affecting young people and women.
     * Norman Raeburn from Tasmania is the current Director of the Legal Aid Commission of Tasmania since January 2000, having previously served in the Commonwealth Attorney General's Department and at the Universities of Monash, Tasmania and New South Wales.
     * Dr Leigh Gassner from Victoria was until recently an Assistant Commissioner for Victoria Police.
This group brings with them to a wealth of experience. I thank them for agreeing to work with us on this most important to this task, and look forward to our collaboration.
The Australian Government is also working outside of our immediate response to the Council's Plan to address the challenges and consequences of violence against women.
For example, violence against women - and in particular domestic violence - remains the main reason for homelessness among women and children.
The Minister, Tanya Plibersek, recently responded to a letter from a single mum in Victoria. Jennifer left an abusive partner and wanted to tell Tanya of her plight. She had no car, no job and no money. Her temporary solution was to take her two sons and move in with her mother until she found a place of her own. She explained to Tanya that, even though she is working hard to get back on her feet, rental prices are high and the housing waiting list is long.
Tanya was able to help Jennifer get in touch with an accommodation and support service in her local area, and also gave her the 1800 number for the Australian Government's National Rental Affordability Scheme Hotline - a scheme which gives investors the incentive to build affordable rental homes which they rent out at 20 per cent below market rates.
The Australian Government is investing more than $1 billion in this scheme over the next four years.
Last December the Government released its White Paper on Homelessness which is supported by a $1.5 billion funding package - the most significant attempt to tackle this national shame in a generation. With this funding, states and territories are implementing a range of strategies to assist families to stay at home safely.
Strategies include improving security in the family home, removing and re-housing the perpetrators where appropriate and working with perpetrators to address the cause of their violence.
On top of this, we've invested $5.6 billion to repair and build the social housing we need for Australians who are homeless, or at risk of becoming homeless.
Government initiatives can make a real impact on reducing violence against women, but members of the community have a critical part to play.
Giving our young men good role models is essential.
I'd like to share with you the story of a project based in Murray Bridge/Coorong, South Australia that shows how important community leadership is in addressing domestic violence.
The Spirited Men's Project is run by the Kalparrin Community organisation and funded by the Australian Government. This is a male perpetrators program that encourages positive parenting and educates Indigenous men about the detrimental effects of family violence.
The program is culturally-based and its focus is on the importance of men in the family unit and as leaders in the broader community. Those running the program report a real change in the participants' personal commitment to the concept of "safer family, safer community".
I spoke earlier of the students at Narrabundah College. We are supporting these young people by giving them the opportunity to gain the skills to change their lives, and to change the lives of those around them.
Like the Spirited Men's Program, they are making change, one person, one school, one community at a time.
I said before this isn't easy. I said before it wouldn't happen overnight. And I said we need action on multiple levels - individual, community, government, societal.
But what White Ribbon shows us is that where there is a will there is a way, and when it comes to taking action, taking responsibility, to stop violence against women there is a will.
I cannot stress enough that we can make a difference for generations to come if we work together to reduce domestic violence.
Lastly, let me now officially launch this year's White Ribbon campaign.
I've already taken the oath. I applaud those men in this room and all Ambassadors of White Ribbon around Australia who have taken the oath. I believe that every Aussie male should.
I'm going to encourage every honourable gentleman in the Australian parliament to take the oath. And in the bureaucracy. And in every electorate in the country.
To end men's violence against women, every Aussie male needs to say: "This is My Oath."
Every man, in every walk of life, all of the 10 million males in Australia, should swear on November 25.
Let's make White Ribbon Day an Australian first, a world first.
Thank you. Good night.


Thank you Bruce, and thank you Bruce, Karen, Rev. Bruce Banton, Professor Nico, Dr Bruce Robinson, John Murphy, my friend and parliamentary colleague from Canberra, representatives of local government, representatives from the state parliament and Matt Peacock, author of Killer Company.
I begin by acknowledging the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
And we also remember today September 11, remember those who perished, we remember the tragedy of that day, the suffering still with their families, and resolve which must remain with all to continue the fight against the forces of global terrorism.
Thank Bruce and thank you Nico for the tremendous work your teams are doing to find a cure for the disease that took Bernie from us, and that has taken so many other husbands, brothers, dads and other loved ones from family members and friends.
I like what Bruce just said about shooting at the moon, sometimes shooting at the stars, but shooting for the moon because we've got to have in ourselves, in our heart and our minds, and the way in which we approach these things, the belief that we can get there. That's what it's all about.
I'm essentially a medical illiterate. I've only been on the receiving end of jabs and scalpels. I've never been on the administrative end. But can I say how much I admire the extraordinary collection of talent and ability we have in the medical research community in this country. I'm constantly stunned by the sheer brilliance of what we in this country are capable of in partnership with our colleagues from around the world.
And yes, let's aim for the moon, let's believe that we can get there, and why not make it Australian? And having a concentration of talents and abilities gathered together with a common purpose which causes us to look beyond the horizon is in part what it's all about.
Nico said that Bernie's last words to him were "We need to join forces." Those of us engaged in public policy research and intense engagement with the medical fraternity describe this as translational research, collaborative endeavour, in the case of cancer, integrated cancer care - all those things. What's it all mean? Whether you're a layman like Bernie, or someone who seriously knows what he's doing like Bruce, and the other Bruce is in communion with the divine on our collective behalves, it's all about working together with support from Government, support from the community, and harnessing the best talents and brains that we have here and across the world. To defeat this insidious disease should be our goal.
I wanted to be here today to launch this very special Foundation, one which salutes a truly great Australian.
Bernie was a man who took on one of the Goliaths of corporate Australia, and like a courageous modern day David, he won that fight.
Bernie epitomised the Australian belief in a fair go. He had the nation's respect for his integrity - he has the nation's respect for his integrity - our amazement remains for his tenacity, our reverence remains for his heroism, and we continue to be inspired by the fact that as this disease dealt with him so unfairly as it deals with so many others, his first instinct was always to have an eye out for others. Others who were suffering, others who he could help with research.
That's why the Bernie Banton Foundation so important, because it was one of his last projects that he discussed with Karen in his final months on earth.
Bernie wasn't content to have fought for justice for himself, and it wasn't enough for him that he'd fought in the years that followed for justice for other victims of asbestos, but he was determined to do more - establishing a Foundation that would do greater work still in the years after he had gone from us.
As many of you know and many of you will be aware, earlier this week another great Australian fighter, Greg Combet - now the Minister for Defence Personnel, Material and Science - launched the book Killer Company by Matt Peacock, a book that chronicles the abhorrent behaviour of James Hardie executives - the abhorrent behaviour of James Hardie executives.
But there are inspirational moments in the book as well, like the account of Bernie and Karen.
We learn how Karen is made of the very much the same stuff as Bernie. As Matt Peacock says, Karen was "superhuman in her stoicism", and with typical Banton energy and determination, she is now turning her energies to helping other families carrying the terrible burden of terrible asbestos-related diseases. And the Reverend Bruce Banton, Bernie's brother, will also be doubling that Banton family effort. With two Banton's against you, how could you possibly prevail?
Here's a man who has lost two of his brothers, Bernie and Ted, to asbestos; and with another brother, Albert, having developed asbestosis. It's good to know that Albert is still in good health, but we know it's a tough road ahead for every person and every family touched by asbestos-related diseases.
The poisoning of Australians by asbestos is a modern day industrial catastrophe. The toll of human suffering and loss from asbestos far exceeds any natural disaster in our nation's history, and its worst impact has fallen on working people and their families in suburbs and towns right across Australia.
Australians working in insulation factories, like Bernie, or in mines. Young men sweating it out in darkened shipping containers on the wharves, heaving bags that leeched asbestos. Aboriginal children in communities like those near Grafton, where a large mound of asbestos served as a sandpit for local schoolchildren in the late 1970s. Wives and mums shaking out the work clothes of their husbands or sons before throwing them in the washing machine. Queensland banana farmers thinking they had struck gold with the hessian asbestos bags so useful for protecting their fruit from birds and bats. Recycled asbestos bags were under our carpets, in driveways, and asbestos was sprayed across the nations' ceilings as a wonder fire retardant in the 1960s and early 1970s.
Over a period of several years, this deadly industrial poison seeped into the pores of our nation - in our homes, our factories, our offices, and finding its way into the lungs of tens of thousands of Australians, where it was latent for many years before its toxic effect became known.
The Bernie Banton Foundation estimates that in just over 10 years, some 40,000 Australians will have contracted asbestos-related cancer.
It's an astonishing toll - equivalent to 25 years of deaths on our roads.
And mesothelioma, which ultimately took Bernie's life, is one of the worst of diseases, for which as yet there's no solution.
It is not a nice disease, as Bruce has reminded us. There are, as Bernie testified, and as his face showed, many days of suffering, anguish and sheer agony as the body slowly shuts down.
Professor Bruce Robinson has said that because of the epidemic of cases of mesothelioma means that across the world, several million people will die as a result of asbestos exposure, as he indicated already today, the costs worldwide are estimated at over $300 billion This is, as I say, one of the great industrial catastrophes of modern time.
And Matt Peacock's book has shed considerable light on the story behind asbestos in Australia - a story that begins for Matt in 1977 when as a young ABC journalist he got an unlikely lead, all because a PR company for James Hardie Asbestos was suspiciously enthusiastic about getting an audio grab of a throwaway line in a 45-minute science program that asserted that the asbestos industry in Australia was no longer a problem.
That began Matt on a quest to reveal the great violation of the trust of Australians by executives of James Hardie and other senior figures in Australian public life. Matt depicts it as a story of gross neglect - he is absolutely right - disgraceful omissions of facts and an arrogant lack of concern for the welfare of Australian workers and their families.
I'm told the full account is jaw-dropping, a damning indictment of what happens when corporations put profits before people. Karen says it should be read by every Australian school child.
It is remarkable that the first recorded case of asbestosis was in 1900 and the first asbestos compensation claim in Australia was in 1939.
James Hardie's management was not ignorant of the risks. They kept files on their state of their employees' health, and thousands of x-rays of their lungs, yet they often kept that information secret.
Like Bernie's medical record - which showed that as early as 1973, when he was working at Hardie's insulation factory, according to specialist opinion, an x-ray showed an ominous thickening of the pleura which indicated "definite early signs" of asbestos disease. It was decades later that Bernie found out about that medical record, hidden by years of absolute deceit.
It leaves a lump in your throat to read the stories of the workers in that factory, most of whom have now succumbed to asbestos diseases.
Matt writes of how the workers at the Camellia insulation factory would work with asbestos dust up to four inches thick under their feet. To quote his book:
"The company had issued a free bottle of milk daily to each worker to ease the irritation it caused to their throats. Sheppard used to pack his bottle in the asbestos to keep it cold: occasionally the men would have 'snow fights' with the dust. Like Banton, Sheppard was adamant the company had said nothing to him about the danger of asbestos cancers."
By 2004, Bernie would tell Matt that only 9 out of his 137 former workmates were still alive, and while James Hardie has moved offshore and jettisoned its asbestos arm, the consequences of those years of exposure to asbestos are still emerging.
Children who helped their dads in the garden, or in a house renovation, are now adults and now contracting asbestos diseases. Kids like Anthony Cini, who was one of many children to fall victim to poisonous asbestos landfill.
Anthony grew up in Sydney's Pendle Hill, not far from the Camellia Plant where his father worked, where Bernie worked. Matt recounts, and I quote again.
"Part of a large Maltese family, he (Anthony) remembered helping his dad load up his truck with asbestos waste which they spread on a driveway around their house and on pathways through the market garden his parents established. 'My father, brothers, and I used shovels and rakes to level out the asbestos tailings on the ground', he told his lawyer. 'My brothers and I played with the asbestos ... we rolled up balls of asbestos dust and fibre and threw it at each other." (p.295)
Anthony contracted mesothelioma when he was 46. He too lost his battle against asbestos.
This is a sad chapter in our nation's story, and it is a terrible chapter in the nation's corporate history, and it should never be forgotten. Every corporate management course in this country, every MBA course, every corporate management course, every place where business professionals are trained should have this book as essential reading about your responsibility to workers.
As Greg Combet made it clear this week, the Australian Government believes that James Hardie has an obligation to asbestos victims and that it must honour the commitments it made to those victims.
The Australian Government recognises the terrible impact of asbestos-related disease on the lives of so many innocent and hard-working Australians. That is why we are establishing the new $2.5 million Centre of Research Excellence into Asbestos Related Disease from 2010.
We have also committed a further $2 million to support the Centre's coordination of research into asbestos-related diseases, funded through the National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC). A $1 million Bernie Banton Asbestos Research Fellowship is also available through the NHMRC.
On 21 January this year I opened The Bernie Banton Centre, also known as the Asbestos Disease Research Institute. The Australian Government has committed $5 million towards the final fit-out costs of the Centre.
The work Nico is doing at the Centre is a major NSW focus for research into these diseases. Nico, it was good to speak to some of your researchers this morning as they sought, patiently, to explain to me what on earth they were doing. It has good prospects of doing quality research and is well supported in NSW, especially by the Dust Diseases Board of NSW.
Nico's team is working with the National Centre for Asbestos Related Diseases. This is an Australian co-operative initiative that embraces all States in the country, with the aim of bringing together the work in each state in order to achieve critical mass and try to cure mesothelioma.
We have some of the best brains in the nation now working together for a cure to mesothelioma, and as Bruce has reminded us, this best brains in the country represent some of the best brains in the world.
This research will benefit future generations here and abroad, but right now there are many families who are suffering, for whom those medical discoveries may come too late.
Like the families Matt mentions in his book, who call up the staff in the Perth-based Asbestos Diseases Society of Australia to say they've just been told they have mesothelioma, "the fatal disease with the unpronounceable name". Those families need immediate support, comfort and access to information and help.
Karen knows all about that. She has a well-grounded understanding of the rollercoaster of emotions - fears anguish, anger, turmoil and despair - which asbestos disease sufferers and their families experience.
She believes there's a desperate need for the support that the Foundation aims to provide: an organisation that reflects his struggle for justice and for hope; that helps those in urgent need whilst also keeping a high-profile focus on critical long-term solutions.
The Foundation will be working with existing asbestos disease support organisations, and its first aim is to raise $400,000. That effort is starting with a major dinner on Friday 27th of November. This marks the third anniversary of Bernie's death, or 'Bernie Banton Day' as Karen would call it - as perhaps we should all call it as well, because Bernie is a bloke who has inspired the nation and touched the nation's heart in a way that we see on only a few occasions in our lifetimes.
I share Karen's vision that out of this initiative we might have a flock of volunteers and professional helpers alike who will go into homes and help newly diagnosed asbestos disease sufferers. 'Bernie's Angels', as Karen calls them - people who can help families navigate the difficult path forward from diagnosis.
In the first year, Karen is aiming to help a minimum of 20 asbestos disease sufferers and their families, and many more in years that follow. Karen, we share your vision and we intend to support you all the way, and though it's not in my notes, and I have no authorisation to say it, we will be contributing to your foundation.
And while it's also not in my notes, I think I've agreed to go to that dinner as well - barring global catastrophe and I'm not offshore. So there's two departures from the script entirely, so my staff will scold me afterwards.
Today I want to urge Australians to support the Bernie Banton Foundation.
To go back to where Bruce left us before, to have ballast, a confidence and a hope and a mission that we can beat this thing, and with a team of researchers and a team of people out there, 'Bernie's Angels', doing the work on the way through. That should be our goal, because that's what Australia's all about.
I thank the team of caring, committed volunteers and individuals who have been touched by the suffering and loss caused by asbestos disease and who are ready to make this Foundation the success it deserves to be.
I know Bernie would be proud of you all. I know Bernie would be proud of you, Karen.
It gives me great pleasure to launch the Bernie Banton Foundation.


Distinguished guests, one and all.
If I could also begin by acknowledging the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
What do Thomas Jefferson, Jim Wallis, and the Poverty and Justice Bible have in common? They've liked defacing this great book. Let me explain how.
Thomas Jefferson, as we've studied the history of the American Revolution, was a great 18th century deist. One of his great accomplishments, of course, was to ensure that the Constitution of the newly founded American Republic did not entrench any single religion.
As an 18th century deist however, Jefferson was sceptical about the bible's supernatural claims. It takes a particular mind, however, to do what Jefferson then did, which was to then physically cut out of the bible any reference to the supernatural.
The Jefferson bible, if you've ever seen it, is distinguished literally, waved in the breeze, full of holes. Jefferson, by the end of that exercise, was content with the document he had produced. I thought this reflected a particular obsession, until I met Jim Wallis, from Sojourners.
Many of you in this room would know of Jim, the author of many books on politics and Christianity in the United States. He's a good friend of Tim, he's a good friend of mine, and his most recent, one of his more recent books, God's Politics, the thesis of which is that God, in the American political context, if not more broadly globally, is not owned by any particular political position, either of the left or of the right.
The story goes that when Jim Wallis began his work with Sojourners, a magazine which I still read, he and his colleagues then sat down in Washington D.C., and again took out the bible and decided to ensure that they would cut out all the reference to God's injunction to social justice. And so they began, as it were, the reverse Jefferson exercise - cut, cut, cut, cut, cut - and again you have this Bible swinging in the breeze.
Of course, the point of Jim Wallis and his colleagues was to demonstrate to the American Christian community at large that this was an incomplete document. If you excise what I understand to be thousands of references in both the prophetic literature of the Old Testament, and of course in the Gospel, the Acts, and the Letters, in fact you have a somewhat decimated document.
But again, it takes a mind of a particular quality to actually sit down - think about it - with your own bible at home, physically cut out- what do you do on the reverse side of the page? Hopefully you and I would think about that. So there you have a commonality of, shall I score, intellectual discipline on the part of Thomas Jefferson, up there with Jim Wallace - and then these people, those who put together the Poverty and Justice Bible.
Because they actually have come up with the world's best compromise - don't cut out, just colour in, and I think that reflects a marvellous history and pre-school training. I don't know about you, but I was always much better at colouring in than cutting out. I've never managed to stay within the lines. Every time I'd go to pre-school with kids who were four or five, they always managed to stay within the lines unlike myself. I always used to just go over the edge.
But this actually overcomes the Jefferson and Wallis challenge, because you don't have the problem of cutting out and then creating a problem for yourself on the reverse side of the page. It's just coloured in.
But when you actually flip through this, as I did last night at The Lodge, and see the extraordinary shadings of orange all the way though, it catches your eye, and I'm sure that's what those who have put together this particular edition of the Bible have had in mind.
Malcolm Turnbull and I have been asked to do many things in our life. Launching a Bible has not been one of them. I know those in the political class are often assumed to be arrogant, and have a view of themselves as being something extraordinary. I have to say to you that neither of us wrote this one.
That's one of those odd things you get asked to do.
If I could reflect for a moment on the organisations who are here with us this morning, and who are party to this great enterprise. Firstly, of course, to World Vision itself. World Vision, founded in 1950, now in 90 countries across the world, providing assistance to 100 million people across the world, including 2.4 million children, employing 22,500 staff. A budget of $1.7 billion. Nearly 400,000 Australians support World Vision each year through child sponsorship and the Forty Hour Famine.
I asked Tim just before I came up what was its Biblical inspiration, which parts of the Bible. And he referred me to John 10:10, and John 10:10 is not the one you said it was Tim! He told me it was about the fullness of life - let me read to you what John 10:10 actually says: 'a thief comes only to rob, kill, and destroy'. Oh, I'm sorry, it's the next part. That's alright, I was just taking the Mickey out of you mate.
"I came so that everyone would have life, and have it fully." Never challenge a Baptist when it comes to the Scriptures. "That they might have life, and might have it more fully", which of course leads to the injunction of World Vision that the world's children might have life, and have it more fully.
This therefore is its inspiration, and this therefore, is its execution - faith, without work, is dead.
The other organisation we honour here today, are of course, the Micah Challenge. I won't challenge what's in the sixth chapter of Micah in the eighth verse, I'm assuming that you've got that right, Tim? Do justice, love mercy, and walk humbly with your God. And Micah's prophetic challenge, of course, is echoed down the ages, of course in the ancient time from which it was written, and the conditions of the time, but also the decades through the centuries. And so it does today.
And the work of Micah Challenge is also significant in Australia in the five years in which it's been operating. Launched in 2004, now campaigns in 40 countries, Micah Challenge has formed a coalition of more than 30 Christian aid and development aid agencies in Australia, embracing Catholic, Protestant and Pentecostal traditions of the Christian faith. More than 101,000 Australians have signed the Micah call in Australia, a personal statement of commitment to work to the ending of global poverty. And the Micah Challenge is of course running the Voices for Justice campaign that's brought to Canberra 270 people from every state and territory, representing churches and schools in cities, regional and country areas.
Of course, the work of World Vision and the work of Micah Challenge, in so many respects would not be possible were it not for the work of a third organisation, which we honour here this morning, which is more ancient than either of them - the Bible Society of Australia.
Of course, the Bible Society of Australia was founded in 1817, back in the days of Lachlan Macquarie, and will soon celebrate its 200 years in this country, and began producing Bibles in the Indigenous languages of Australia and New Zealand from as early as 1827, when it produced the Bible, a New Testament, in Maori.
And this is where the three great institutions come together. One, of course, is the propagation of the Bible itself. And the second, organisations like Micah Challenge, and of course World Vision, which take their inspiration from the saying 'faith without works is dead'.
Of course, for those of us engaged in national political life, our work on policy is incomplete unless we are working arm-in-arm with the great organisations of the Church and charitable sector.
All of you in this room know full well that there is a limit to what Government can do. All of you know full well that, when it comes to dealing with poverty, at home and abroad, this is often done best when you have a creative and effective partnership between the resources of Government and the compassion of Church and charitable organisations.
And that's what we see writ large across the world, and that's what we see writ large for the work of these two great institutions. In Australia, what we have sought to do in recent times is to put our shoulder to the wheel by lifting Australia's contribution to ODA around the developing world.
This is the right and necessary thing to do, and I'm pleased that in doing it we've had the support of the Opposition in Australian politics, because, when we confront the challenges we have with poverty at home - they are great, and they must be attended to: problems of homelessness, problems of simple destitution, problems of absolute isolation, and alienation.
Problems abroad however, cannot be ignored. Remember, it was Wesley who said 'the world is my parish'. And so it is for us as well.
Therefore, by lifting what we seek to do around the world, and by also putting our shoulder to the wheels of other countries in pursuit of the Millennium Development Goals, our objective is to make a real and quantifiable difference.
The Christian traditions from which you all come are many and varied. But I think all of you in this room would agree with one thing: it is not simply and exclusively some individual, pietistic retreat into yourself in pursuit of some microscopic spirituality. No, it's not that. It is a tradition alive in the fact that faith without works is dead, and that the Christian doctrine to which you all aspire, and which you all believe, is one that is both about individual spirituality and a parallel commitment to social justice.
Which brings me in full circle back to this tome which we launch today, the Poverty and Justice Bible.
I congratulate those who have put together this extraordinary work. I congratulate those who have seen fit to assemble a version of the Bible which draws starkly to people's attention the challenge of Micah, the challenge of John, the challenge facing us all as an informed community of faith.
May it be an inspiration for many more Australians to contribute to the worldwide fight against poverty and injustice, and a better and fairer future for people of all nations, all colours and all creeds.
And it's therefore a great honour for me to join with all of you here in Canberra today, for the launch of this Poverty and Justice Bible.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
Mr President
Secretary-General
Distinguished delegates to the 64th General Assembly of the United Nations.
I come to this Assembly as Australia has each year since the first General Assembly in 1946, and I come in the same spirit: to seek solutions to the great challenges of our age, and together help give them effect.
These challenges are not new.
They are reflected in the preamble to the Charter which we as an international community crafted together:
     * to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war
     * to advance economic growth and social progress for all
     * to reaffirm faith in fundamental human rights
         * in the equal rights of men and women
         * and the rights of nations large and small
     * and for all of these great undertakings to be reflected in a new body of international law
Two-thirds of a century later, these great international values remain constant while the challenges to which we apply them are subject to continuing change.
And it is on the current challenges facing the global order that I wish to speak to this 64th General Assembly today - the global financial crisis, the unfinished business of the Doha Round, the unfolding crisis of the planet itself, the unresolved question of nuclear weapons 20 years after the end of the Cold War - and of the future of global governance itself.
Just on a year ago, just down the road from here, a destructive chain of events triggered the worst global financial crisis in three quarters of a century.
And it was just on a year ago that I addressed this Assembly for the first time, 10 days after the collapse of Lehman Brothers, to reflect on the challenges which lay ahead for the proper regulation of global financial markets.
That reform program is now underway through the G20, the Financial Stability Board and the IMF.
But there remains much to be done to prevent the unrestrained greed of unregulated financial markets that has wrought such economic carnage across the world these last 12 months from sowing the seeds of future financial crises.
Mr President, the global financial crisis has been a wake-up call to the international community to reform the institutions of global economic governance.
And a wake-up call that our system of global governance today is in radical need of reform.
Because the truth is that the failure of these institutions is not just a matter of concern for governments, for diplomats, and for economists.
The price of failure of these institutions has been paid by working people and their families right across the world. 
The events on Wall Street spread rapidly and indiscriminately to every corner of the globe.
From London to Lima; from Beijing to Barcelona; from Melbourne to Mumbai.
Developed and developing economies.
This global financial crisis and its ensuing economic and employment crisis has been no respecter of national boundaries - and no respecter of people.
Australia has been no exception.
The global financial crisis saw the Australian stock market fall by 55 per cent; wiped around $150 billion from the retirement savings of Australian workers; and has led to tens of thousands of Australians losing their jobs. And we expect more job losses to follow.
Behind each of these statistics lies the face of working Australians who have seen their savings diminish, their financial security eroded and their job security threatened.
Like Liverpool in Sydney, where the decline in its light-manufacturing base has led to an increase in unemployment of 4.5 per cent over the past year - and now 19,000 people are out of work in that area.
Like the tourist destination of Cairns in Far North Queensland, where unemployment has risen 3.7 per cent over the past year, meaning 13,300 people are now out of work in that area.
And like the south-eastern suburbs of Perth, where unemployment has risen 3.3 per cent in the past year, leaving 12,800 people in that community without a job.
In communities like these across Australia, the global recession is hurting in very real ways.
Just as in communities like these across the world, the global recession is hurting in very real ways.
Mr President, we can never forget these men, these women and their families as we seek to find a path out of this global recession.
While our global economic system failed comprehensively to prevent this crisis, the G20 governments have rallied to reduce the damage and prevent systemic collapse.
Through the agency of the G20, for the first time involving heads of government from the major developed and developing economies, governments acted in concert:
     * to provide around $13.6 trillion worth of support to directly stabilise the global financial system;
     * to inject $5.5 trillion worth of fiscal stimulus into the global economy;
     * to provide $1.1 trillion in resources to the International Financial Institutions to give markets confidence that any subsequent collapses could be dealt with;
     * to develop an integrated framework of toxic asset management to repair the balance sheets of many major banks; and
     * to initiate a comprehensive financial markets reform program through the Financial Stability Board.
The IMF has assessed that these extraordinary interventions succeeded in breaking the fall in what was an economic crisis spiralling out of control.
But the truth is our global economic recovery is far from certain and many twists and turns lie ahead.
Furthermore, the institutions of global economic governance are facing new challenges.
First, the financial market reform program must be completed and implemented to prevent a future crisis.
Second, in anticipation of global economic recovery, we must agree on a framework for the coordinated withdrawal of our emergency interventions.
And third, and most critically, we must articulate a new framework for sustainable future economic growth.
A framework that doesn't simply return to business-as-usual - based on unsustainable financial imbalances; excessive consumption fuelled by consumer and corporate debt; and irresponsible risk-taking in systemically significant financial institutions.
One of the failures of the old growth model of the last decade was the lack of effective global economic coordination. 
This allowed imbalances to grow unchecked and financial institutions to remain inadequately supervised.
As we move towards recovery, we must build a framework to foster both growth and balance in the global economy.
The IMF estimates that effectively implemented coordination between major economies could add significantly to global growth - an additional 10 percent to global output or around $6 trillion over a five year period.
To achieve this "coordination dividend", the G20 will need to build on the structures of cooperation that have been established during the crisis and apply them to the new challenges of the global recovery.
In Pittsburgh we have an historic opportunity to agree on a framework to deliver effective coordination of our national economic policies.
This framework should have four key elements:
     * First, G20 members should agree on a common objective to achieve balanced and sustainable growth.
     * Second, G20 members should outline their own national economic strategy and identify how it contributes to our common objectives.
     * Third, the IMF should analyse the individual national economic plans to determine whether they are consistent and collectively adequate to achieve sustainable and balanced global growth.
     * Fourth, these reports should be submitted to the G20 to form the basis of a peer review process which would identify specific risks and vulnerabilities.
This framework should be consistent with, and an important input to, the development of a set of global principles such as the current proposal from Germany for a charter for sustainable economic activity.
Mr President, the other great global challenge of our age is climate change.
With only 74 days remaining until the Copenhagen Conference, the governments of the world are far from agreement.
Enough has been said on the need for action on climate change.
But as of today not enough action has been taken.
Our collective political will to date has not been adequate to meet the task.
For too long, discussions between developed and developing countries have degenerated into mutual recriminations.
Developing countries accusing developed countries of failing to meet their obligations, given their undeniable responsibility for the bulk of greenhouse gas emissions already in the atmosphere.
Developed countries warning the major emerging economies that unless they take action, global warming will increase to unacceptable levels based on emerging economy emissions alone.
The trouble is both arguments are right.
What is required globally is the leadership to embrace this truth and respond to it accordingly.
The truth is all governments need to reach beyond their self interests and instead fashion a "Grand Bargain" between the developed and developing countries of the world.
A "Grand Bargain" which embraces both historical and future responsibility.
A "Grand Bargain" which is anchored in the science of climate change and the need to keep temperature rises within two degrees Celsius to avoid catastrophic climate change.
A "Grand Bargain" which embraces the three great challenges of climate change which we are yet to resolve:
     * What binding targets and commitments developed and developing countries must adopt to keep temperature rises within two degrees Celsius;
     * What public and private climate change financing arrangements are necessary to support the mitigation and adaptation measures we need to implement in the future; and
     * What technology transfer we need to undertake in renewable energy, carbon capture and storage, energy efficiency and the avoidance of deforestation and forest degradation to bring about real reductions in greenhouse gas emissions.
In the period ahead, the "grand bargain" we must strike needs to resolve all three of these challenges as each is inextricably dependent on the other.
We must make use of all available mechanisms for international co-operation, including the MEF and the G20, to achieve success in these negotiations.
For us all, this will be a test of leadership.
Leadership which seeks to lift our collective vision beyond today and instead focus on the needs of tomorrow. 
But time is short.
As Chair of the Pacific Islands Forum, I know that time is already running out for the island states of the Pacific. 
Coastal inundation is not a prospect but a fact.
50 per cent of the population of these island states reside within 1.5 kilometres of the coast.
The South Pacific is part of the human face of climate change.
And that's why Australia nationally, regionally and globally stands ready to play its part in acting on this great moral, environmental and economic challenge of our age.
Mr. President
This organisation was born in the shadow of nuclear weapons and that shadow remains today. 
One truth remains absolutely clear: the proliferation of nuclear weapons can never make any country more secure.
The nuclear test by North Korea this year was rightly condemned across the international community.
It reiterates that the only path to safety is through the eventual elimination of nuclear weapons.
Australia is encouraged by the commitment of the US and Russia to further reduce their nuclear arsenals.
But the international community must also progress the broader disarmament and non-proliferation agenda.
The Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty has played a crucial role in limiting the spread of nuclear weapons - but the Treaty today is under challenge.
We must work to ensure the Treaty's global security benefits are reinforced by a successful Review Conference in 2010.
To reinvigorate global consensus and activism ahead of that Conference and beyond, Australia and Japan last year established the International Commission on Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament.
In the next few months, the Commission will produce its final report.
Its aim is to chart a practical and realistic course to achieve a strengthened non-proliferation and disarmament regime, leading to the ultimate elimination of nuclear arsenals.
Tomorrow's Security Council summit on non-proliferation and disarmament is important for us all.
We must not lose the opportunity it offers to summon the political resolve to move towards a nuclear weapons-free world.
Mr President, the challenges of global governance extend beyond the global financial crisis, climate change and the threat of nuclear weapons.
The realisation of the Millennium Development Goals is fundamental to the elimination of extreme poverty. 
It remains an obscenity that in 2009, after an age of unprecedented global prosperity, 1.5 billion of our fellow human beings are living in extreme poverty.
This is a core reason why the Australian Government has committed to increasing official development assistance to 0.5 per cent of GNI - to help close the development gap which has been widening in many Pacific Island countries while also helping, where possible, to deal with poverty elsewhere in Asia, Africa and the Caribbean. Mr President, parallel to the MDGs, the Doha Development Round has now been going for eight years.
This is too long.
The negotiating gap between us all is not wide - but the deficit in political will to conclude the Round seems vast. 
As the world searches for a new growth formula to sustain long term economic recovery, surely Doha represents one critical element. Australia, as one of the lead negotiators within the Doha Round, remains ready to help bridge the negotiating gap.
Mr President - Let the Assembly also not forget the continuing critical work of the UN across the full spectrum of global governance: international peace-keeping operations; humanitarian operations; food security; women; health; children and refugees - all hallmarks of a civilised global order.
The United Nations is not a place. It is not an institution. It is us.
"We, the people of the United Nations", as the Charter begins.
It is we who must find solutions to the problems we face; build consensus around those solutions; and implement those solutions.
This Organization had its beginnings not in an act of will - though will was certainly needed - but in an act of imagination.
An idea of what the world should and could be.
This is the challenge of leadership - to imagine a future worth having and then craft that vision into a practical and present reality.
Mr President - That was the challenge to which our forebears rose in 1945. That is the challenge to which our generation must now rise for the future. I thank the Assembly.


It is a privilege to be introduced by Theodore Roosevelt IV. 
Teddy Roosevelt was President of the United States in the year the Commonwealth of Australia came into being. 
He dispatched the Great White Fleet in 1907 to symbolise the emergence of the US as a global superpower with global interests. 
To the great annoyance of the mother country and without any reference to London whatsoever, Australia extended an invitation to President Roosevelt for the Fleet to visit Australia. 
And with that single act of Australian insubordination against both our and your former colonial masters, a good time has been had by all for the hundred years since in this great Australian-American relationship. 
So much so that a hundred years later, to commemorate the visit of the Great White Fleet, we finally decided to 
return the favour when, earlier this year, ships of the Royal Australian Navy visited New York.
I'm reliably informed that in both 1908, when the Fleet arrived in Australia, and 2009, the sailors of both our navies had a pretty good time - and relations between our two countries were enhanced both bilaterally and, of course, personally. 
It's worth reflecting on what President Roosevelt wrote in his autobiography about that first naval visit and his views on the future of the Australian-US relationship way back in the days of the Great White Fleet. 
"I have, as every American ought to have, a hearty admiration for, and fellow feeling with, Australia, and I believe that America should be ready to stand back of Australia in any serious emergency. The reception accorded the fleet in Australia was wonderful, and it showed the fundamental community of feeling between ourselves and the great commonwealth of the South Seas."
And while, over the past 100 years, the world has changed fundamentally, the ties that bind our two great democracies have not. 
Ties that remain deep and wide and broad. 
I have entitled my remarks today 'American leadership and the emerging global order'.
The challenges of global governance are not new to our intensively globalised age. 
Sixty-five years ago, not far from where we gather today, John Maynard Keynes reflected on the challenges of global governance during his remarks to the concluding plenary session of the Bretton Woods conference in July of 1944.
Keynes said: "...we have perhaps accomplished here at Bretton Woods something more significant than what is embodied in this Final Act. We have shown that a concourse of forty-four nations are actually able to work together at a constructive task in amity and unbroken concord. 
Few believed it possible. If we can continue in a larger task as we have begun in this limited task, there is hope for the world". 
This "larger task" was of governance which lay beyond the scope and powers of the Bretton Woods machinery which he and his colleagues had so painstakingly crafted. 
Sixty-five years later, I doubt that Keynes would say we have risen to this task. 
Sixty-five years on, we are still, by and large, seeking to make do with the global institutions, both political and economic, crafted in San Francisco and at Bretton Woods. 
Our global institutions have largely remained static while the world they were designed to serve has been dynamic beyond anyone's imagining.
First, there has been a proliferation in the number of global actors - whereas only 50 states gathered in San Francisco, that number has since quadrupled to 192, leaving aside the parallel proliferation in the number of non-state actors. 
Furthermore, the global economy of today has become a truly global economy - unimaginable to the relatively autonomous economies of the immediate post-war period. 
In short, the global institutions have not kept pace with the rapidly changing global reality. 
This is not an argument for their wholesale replacement. 
It is, however, an argument for their comprehensive renewal. 
The reality in this modern, dynamic world is that renewal can only occur, as with Bretton Woods and as with San Francisco, through the creative agency of US global leadership. 
Some say that in this age of political multi-polarity and economic globalisation, the US is no longer capable of such leadership. 
Some say the US may be unwilling to provide such leadership. 
And others, both at home and abroad, who say the United States should not provide such leadership. 
I argue that all three propositions are fundamentally wrong. 
America remains an overwhelming force for good in the world. 
America, virtually unique in the history of great powers, has sought to exercise its global power in a manner mindful of a wider interest that is greater than its narrowly calculated national interest. 
Just as today, America remains uniquely qualified - through the combination of its hard power and its soft power - through the narrative of its history and the consistency of its purpose - to shoulder the great responsibilities of our time. 
Importantly for us all, these are also the virtues and values that we see at work once again in the policy and purpose of the US Administration today. 
The United States is not unfamiliar with the burden of leadership.
Nor is the United States unfamiliar with the criticism that comes from the exercise of leadership. 
And while the US will from time to time make misjudgements in its foreign policies like other nations, it is important to recognise that it is America that invariably has answered the call when others mysteriously have fled the field. 
It was American leadership that won the War. 
It was American leadership that also won the Peace - ultimately with the collapse of the Soviet Union and the end of the Cold War. 
But neither winning the war nor winning the peace meant the end of history. 
History is shaped by human hands, collective decisions and the agency of political leadership. 
And political leadership is required today to shape the vast array of forces now at work in this new age of globalisation - forces that have been unleashed since the fall of the Berlin Wall. 
Globalisation of security, globalisation of the economy, globalisation of the environment, and to some extent of the globalisation of cultures themselves. 
With all these challenges, the need for global leadership becomes greater, not lesser. 
No longer hot war. No longer Cold War. But instead an extraordinarily complex peace. 
My argument today is straightforward:
First, by any rational measurement, US global power will remain unchallenged for the first quarter of the current century and arguably, for much of the second. 
Second, US global leadership must nonetheless be deployed in a policy environment that is more interconnected, complex and contested than at any time since 1945. 
Third, notwithstanding this complexity, US leadership remains uniquely capable of shaping the global outcomes that will enhance our common security, our common prosperity and our common interest in the sustainability of the planet. 
Finally, rather than a return to US unilateralism, or its radical alternative, the wholesale redesign of the global order, there is instead a further alternative before us of US global leadership for the future. 
One which seeks to renew the existing institutions of global governance from within. 
To render them effective for the current age. 
To do so by acting as the pivotal power within the system rather than simply railing at the system from without. 
Recognising throughout that while the United States can lead, and while the United States should lead, the lessons of recent years remind us that the United States cannot be expected to do so alone. 
American leadership must also be supported in this new endeavour by a new "driving centre" of global politics and the global economy - a group of nations, both developed and developing, sharing a broad commitment to make the existing institutions of global governance solve the problems existing faced by the global order - rather than simply avoid them. 
This, I believe, is the current direction of the Obama Administration. 
There is a degree of faddishness, both in the academic literature and in some of the political commentary, about the inevitable decline and demise of US global power. 
People have been predicting the decline of US power since the "missile gap" debate of 1960; the oil crises of 1970s; the rise of Japan in the 1980s; the rise of China since the late 1990s; and, most recently, the implosions arising from the global financial crisis. 
In fact, there is an almost soothing regularity to these episodic predictions of American decline and despair. 
To paraphrase the immortal Mark Twain, reports of America's death are greatly exaggerated. 
- US global strategic reach remains unparalleled with its total military spending representing almost half of total global military spending and more than seven times that of China's;
- US naval strength is again unparalleled - with its total naval tonnage exceeding the world's next 13 fleets combined; 
- The US economy has been the world's largest economy for the more than 120 years, and for much of the last 100 years has represented about one-quarter of global GDP - as it does today; 
- The US economy is three times the size of the world's second largest economy, Japan, in market exchange rate terms;
- More than one-third of the world's twenty largest companies are American;
- America is the world's leading producer of scientific papers, performs as much research and development as the rest of the OECD combined and has an unrivalled capacity for innovation; 
- Furthermore, unlike many other major economies, the US has and will continue to have a large, growing and young population - a key driver of long term economic growth; 
- Finally, as demonstrated by the most recent findings of the Pew Research Center, America is rated overwhelmingly positively in most global public opinion surveys on its image in the world - a remarkable feat for any superpower given the precedent of superpowers in ages past.[i] 
The objective barometers of US global power are therefore in reasonable working order. 
Notwithstanding these great strategic strengths, America and its friends, partners and allies are also wrestling with the new challenges of globalisation. 
This is underlined in the most recent "Global Trends: 2025" report produced by the US National Intelligence Council. 
In mapping trends for the first quarter of the current century, the NIC reaches a number of important conclusions:
First, that "the United States will remain the single most powerful country but will be less dominant". 
Second, "the unprecedented shift in relative wealth and economic power, roughly from west to east, now on the way, will continue".
Third, "a global multi-polar system is emerging, with the rise of China, India and others. The relevant power of non-state actors - businesses, tribes, religious organisations and even criminal networks will also continue". 
And fourth, listed by the NIC as a key uncertainty for the future, is "whether global powers work with multilateral institutions to adapt their structure and performance to the transformed geopolitical landscape". 
This latter finding by the NIC goes to the absolute core of the dilemma we confront today: as we wrestle with an increasingly complex and contested global order but with a global architecture that has not fundamentally changed in two-thirds of a century. 
The new and pressing functional demands of a rapidly unfolding global order are now rubbing up against the increasingly dysfunctional nature of global institutions that are either out of their depth; insufficiently empowered; or reduced to a negotiating stalemate by the politics of the lowest common denominator. 
We have seen this in a number of global institutions. 
We have seen this in the UN Security Council. 
We have seen it on nuclear disarmament.
We have seen it in the Doha Round. 
We have seen it on the Millennium Development Goals.
We have seen it on climate change. 
And most critically, we have seen it recently with the IMF - impeded by its limited and now almost ancient mandate, and by the limited resources made available to it - to deal with a financial and economic crisis of the type we have had forced upon us these last 12 months. 
In many respects, the global financial crisis has demonstrated one core point: that the formal institutional architecture established to deal with a potential systemic collapse failed when put to the test - and had to be rapidly superseded by the emergency actions of central banks and executive governments acting through the agency of the G20. 
In other words, the pre-existing global financial architecture had reached a tipping point. 
And as a result, the global financial system came scarily close to collapse.
The world cannot afford a crisis of this magnitude in relation to security, trade, or climate change.
But whether it is nuclear disarmament, global economic management or the environment, I argue we now have an unprecedented responsibility to make the global system work. 
We will be failing in our duties as leaders at this point in history if we do not revitalise, reform and re-build the international system.
If we do not, we will have failed our generation.
And if we do not, the historians of the future will legitimately look back at this period in history and conclude that we failed as leaders to lead when our nations needed it most. 
I do not therefore believe we can simply allow these deep global challenges simply to languish in the global 'too hard' basket.
And, to return to my theme, this can only be achieved by a combination of the national power and the reforming passion of the United States - reinforced by the reforming passion of a core group of states also prepared to help broker the political compromises necessary to make the existing system deliver results.
America's efforts to renew the existing global architecture are already under way.
We see it in the UN Security Council through the President's decision to occupy himself the Chair of the Security Council while the US occupies the presidency. 
We see it on nuclear arms control and disarmament.
We see it in relation to the Doha round. 
We see it on climate change.
We see it in the UN Millennium Development Goals.
And, most critically, we have seen it through the use of the G20 to frame and implement a global policy response to the gravest global economic crisis we have confronted since the Great Depression. 
I note particularly President Obama's statement last week here in New York, that beyond the current crisis he saw an important role for the future of the G20. 
I referred earlier to a future US role in global governance as the pivotal power supported by what I have also described as the "driving centre" of the world's major economies. 
I believe the G20 provides the best available vehicle for doing that for the future. 
The debate about global governance is invariably a debate about the often conflicting objectives of legitimacy and efficiency. 
While the UN General Assembly may have absolute legitimacy as a democracy of states, its efficiency as a delivery agent for real global outcomes is limited. 
The challenge, therefore, is to develop a body which is sufficiently representative in its membership to have 
legitimacy while being sufficiently small in its numbers and efficient in its actions to be able to produce results. 
In terms of legitimacy, the G20 brings together economies representing around 90% of global market cap, 85% of global GDP, 80% of global trade - and more than two-thirds of the world's population.
The G20 also draws together five countries from the Americas, five from Asia, five from Europe and five from elsewhere, including South Africa and Australia.
The G20 critically includes China and India which between them will shape the pattern of history in the 21st century - (and it should be noted that both these countries have already played the role of constructive, responsible stakeholders in the G20's deliberations.)
The G20 also, for the first time, brings together three countries from the Muslim world, including the largest Muslim country in the world, Indonesia. 
But because it is only 20 in number, the G20 is also capable of making effective decisions, as I believe we demonstrated at the London Summit in April. 
In particular, decisions taken on global fiscal stimulus; a global framework for toxic asset management within banks; the resourcing of the IMF to deal with any future institutional collapses; the implementation of seven critical areas of financial regulatory reform to reduce the risks of future crisis; and a moratorium on further protectionist measures.
The IMF has estimated that the London G20 Summit actually broke the fall in the global economy which, between September and March, had been engaged in virtual freefall. 
We also look forward to working further with President Obama further on the G20 challenges which lie ahead.
Both in Pittsburgh.
And at the Summits that will come after Pittsburgh as we wrestle with the challenges of the future. 
Australia supports American global leadership in these great global challenges that lie ahead. 
As two robust democracies, we will not always agree. 
But these will always be disagreements among friends rather than foes.
Always as allies, never as adversaries. 
And always in partnership for the common good. 
And the reason is simple: there is no more important relationship for Australia than our relationship with the United States of America. 
We share common interests. 
More importantly, we share common values. 
And, for much of the last century, we shared a common history. 
We are one of the world's oldest continuing democracies. 
We are one of the United States' oldest continuing allies. 
We have fought alongside the United States in every major war since US entry into the First World War in 1917. 
We are also a country with our own assets to bring to the table. 
Of the nearly 200 independent states in the world today, Australia is the 14th largest economy, in market exchange rate terms.
By market exchange rates, Australia is the fourth largest economy in Asia - after Japan, China and India. 
Ours is a modern, well managed economy:
- We have been the only one of thirty-three IMF advanced economies to have generated positive growth over the past year;
- Unlike every Major Advanced Economy, we have so far avoided recession; 
- We have the second lowest unemployment, the lowest debt and the lowest deficit of all the Major Advanced Economies;
- We are using part of our infrastructure stimulus strategy to begin rolling out a high speed National Broadband Network for 90% of the country at 100 megabits per second;
- And of the world's 9 remaining AA plus rated banks, 4 are Australian.
On security, of the 192 UN member states, Australia's is the twelfth largest military budget worldwide. 
We have released a Defence White Paper which, over the next 20 years, will significantly expand our naval forces given the fact that we have responsibility for the third largest maritime jurisdiction in the world. 
In Afghanistan, we are among the top ten military contributors and the largest non-NATO contributor. 
Second to the United States, we are the largest contributor to the Afghan National Army Trust Fund, dedicated to training the Afghan National Army.
And, as of next year, after the United States, we will be the largest foreign training destination for staff officers of the Pakistan armed forces in counter-insurgency training. 
Both globally and within the Asia-Pacific, we pursue an active diplomacy - deploying what we describe as creative middle-power diplomacy. 
Australia has established the International Commission on Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament in conjunction with Japan. 
We are committed to implementing the Millennium Development Goals - with a particular focus on the Pacific. 
Australia is also working with our regional friends and partners in shaping the long term institutional architecture of the Asia-Pacific region - a region that will increasingly become the centre of geo-economic, geo-strategic and geo-political activity in the century ahead. 
It is for these reasons that Australia has advocated a regional dialogue for the long term development of what we have described as an Asia-Pacific Community - for the first time creating a pan-regional body capable of addressing the political, security and economic challenges of our wider region. 
We have put a long-term timetable on this - 2020. 
Our mission is simple but the task is complex - to craft the habits, the culture and the institutions of cooperation across the Asia Pacific Community - building the confidence and security-building measures and sense of common security which will help the century of the Asia Pacific to be a truly pacific century.
On all these challenges, the Australian Government looks forward to continuing to work closely with the US Administration. 
I have recently appointed as our new Ambassador to the United States, Kim Beazley - former Deputy Prime Minister and Defence Minister of Australia - to underpin the importance we attach to this relationship. Kim's distinguished career, his depth of understanding and his love for this country will no doubt serve us well in expanding our great relationship. 
Earlier this year, Bob Zoellick, the President of the World Bank, posed a question for us all through the pages of the Financial Times on how we might choose to shape our global destiny for the century ahead.
An "age of reversal and decline" in which we make excuses for inertia?
Or an "age of responsibility" in which we decide to tackle the problems of the future together? 
Zoellick's definition of an "age of reversal" is stark: an age in which "countries retreat into national solutions behind national borders, taking their memories of prosperity with them" and where immigrants and foreigners are met with intolerance and blamed for rising unemployment.
Conversely, an "age of responsibility" would herald an era of responsible global stakeholders where "inclusivity and sustainability take precedence over the enrichment of a few". 
In this "age of responsibility", there would be common responsibility for the stewardship of the planet; common responsibility for the elimination of extreme poverty; common responsibility for the liberalisation of trade; common responsibility for the management of the global financial system. 
There are two core concepts alive in Zoellick's "age of responsible stakeholders".
Each of us having sufficient skin in the game to want to make the international system work. 
As well as an international system driven by "an expanded steering group grounded in current economic realities".
This is very much the framework within which Australia sees the future of the G20 - what I have already described as a "driving centre" of the existing institutions of global governance. 
A "driving centre" in which political agreements can be forged at the highest levels between heads of government in order to drive technical negotiations, otherwise stalemated, towards timely conclusion. 
Whether we are debating the global architecture of the future.
Or the regional architecture of the future.
Or the detailed global policy agendas that now lie before us - on security, the economy, climate change or development.
Together we must seize the day.
That is why Australia looks forward with energy and enthusiasm to working with the United States on these great challenges that lie ahead. 
Developing the global institutions for the future, and through them, delivering the global policies that might become our future. 
To borrow Dean Acheson's phrase of a half a century ago, the United States was "present at the creation" of the world's global governance architecture. 
So too was Australia. 
Together with you at San Francisco. 
Together with you at Bretton Woods. 
Present with you at the creation. 
Now present with you again, two-thirds of a century later, and this time for the regeneration. 
To build together the functioning global institutions that we now need to negotiate the formidable shoals that lie ahead in the 21st Century.
________________________________________


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
It is an honour tonight to be the first Prime Minister to deliver the Sambell Oration.
It is an honour because as Prime Minister I wish to publicly recognise the work of the Brotherhood of St Laurence in the pursuit of social justice in Australia for more than three quarters of a century.
I would like in particular to pay public tribute to the work of Gerard Kennedy Tucker, the founder of the Brotherhood of St Laurence and Community Aid Abroad - and Geoffrey Sambell, who led the Brotherhood in exemplary and visionary fashion from 1954 to 1969.
In Australia's pantheon of community leaders, we would be hard pressed to find a man of greater tenacity and commitment than Tucker. He was one of Australia's pre-eminent Christian social activists and his life was a living sermon of faith in action.
His compassion was forged on the battlefields of the First World War in France, where as a young chaplain he buried almost 1000 men, writing to the next of kin of each of them, sending the last messages and any personal belongings he had been able to salvage back home.
For an ordinary mortal, a task like that would leave you shattered, hard-bitten and cynical - but not Tucker.
In the years that followed, he led a crusade against poverty, joblessness and the hopelessness brought on by the Great Depression.
When he established the Brotherhood, with just four men in Adamstown NSW in December 1930, Australia was in the grip of Depression and the Brotherhood literally had nothing but a dilapidated second-hand Chevrolet.
He had a faith that in reaching out to help the destitute and the homeless, he was doing God's work. And so God would provide the resources he needed.
So with nothing more than three promotional films, he hit the road to raise support.
Not that he was too heavenly minded about it.
He recognised a sharp publicity angle when he found it.
So when Premier Thomas Hollway said he was too busy to view the films, Tucker began promoting them as "the films the Premier dare not see" - bringing many more people to see them, and raising more funds for the cause.
And so began one of the most respected and effective community organisations in this country.
Tucker made an outstanding contribution to Australian life but he never had much interest in the accolades he was given in recognition of his.
There's a great story of how, after he moved house in 1959, someone found an OBE in the rubbish he left behind - an OBE awarded three years before for his services to the community.
It wasn't out of disrespect he'd disregarded it - it just didn't matter to him.
Tucker was a man of self-sacrifice, not self-glorification, but his achievements by any measure merited the highest national honour.
Geoffrey Sambell built on this legacy in the years that followed.
Under his leadership, the BSL was the first voluntary organisation to employ a professional social worker.
He fostered integration between various disciplines - law, psychology, social studies and theology.
And he would be especially proud today of the Brotherhood's strong partnership with Melbourne University - which builds on the work done years ago to develop the Henderson poverty line, and which now brings together the research capacity of the University with the applied policy and service delivery experience of the Brotherhood.
Central to each of the initiatives the Government is taking to build a fairer Australia is our own partnership with the third sector and organisations like the Brotherhood of St Laurence.
These are organisations that so often carry the burden of caring for the people left on the margins of what can sometimes be a brutal and inhumane modern economy.
Here at the Brotherhood, Tony Nicholson has made an outstanding contribution to the work the Government has undertaken in the past two years.
We greatly value his work on homelessness - chairing the Australian Government's Steering Group for the development of the White Paper on Homelessness last year, and now chairing the inaugural Prime Minister's Council on Homelessness.
We value also his work on the Government's Social Inclusion Board.
And as well, his participation with Lindsay Fox and Bill Kelty in the Keep Australia Working forums - engaging local employers, unions and community groups around the nation to maximise jobs and training opportunities for communities most vulnerable to the global downturn.
Tony Nicholson is a great Australian, working for a great Australian institution.
He has strong views, but he doesn't just sit back and criticise. Nor does he throw up his hands when things are tough.
Instead, he rolls up his sleeves, looks at the evidence, and works out solutions that deliver results for people in desperate need - an approach that characterises the whole staff and volunteer team at the BSL.
On behalf of all Australians, thank you, and the BSL, for your outstanding work in the continuing cause of social justice for all Australians.
Of course, social justice is an almost impossible mission in the absence of a strong economy.
A strong economy generates the resources necessary to build equality of opportunity for all Australians, and to build a sufficient safety net to support with dignity those Australians who cannot support themselves.
The truth is the strength of our economy has in recent times been fundamentally threatened by the impact of the global financial crisis.
This crisis has generated the single greatest global economic downturn since the Great Depression. Not only a financial crisis, but also an employment crisis, and in many communities, a social crisis as well.
We gather tonight exactly one year to the day since I went before the Australian people on national television to outline the Government's emergency response to the global crisis.
12 months ago, the global financial system was on the precipice.
We were looking into the abyss of the total failure of the global financial system, the collapse of the global economy and the real possibility of a global Depression of indefinite severity and duration.
The inter-bank lending markets that turn the wheels of the global financial system had effectively shut down.
The world's largest insurance company, America's fourth-largest investment bank and the world's largest providers of housing finance were either bankrupted or bailed out.
More than 40 major banks around the world encountered the same fate. Entire banking systems needed to be rescued, recapitalised or nationalised.
The financial crisis was on a scale unseen since the 1930s.
One year later, as a result of the direct and decisive interventions by government, we have pulled back from the brink.
We have been through the sharpest contractions in global output in 75 years. An estimated 60 million people are still expected to lose their jobs in the developed world this year.
The global recession has reversed progress towards reducing poverty in developing nations around the world, and the global economy faces a long, difficult and uneven recovery.
But through the coordinated agency of governments around the world, steeled by the history of the Great Depression and the failure of governments then to rise to the challenge that was before them, today the governments of the world have managed to avoid global financial and economic collapse.
Through the collective agency of the G-20, governments throughout the world, central banks and regulatory agencies have worked together with unprecedented coordination to restore confidence and stability to global finance and the global economy.
In Australia, as the crisis unfolded fully one year ago, we brought together the nation's most senior economic officials around the Cabinet table.
We had just one clear goal: to do everything we could to cushion our economy from the full impact of a global economic cyclone by saving and supporting the jobs of working families around Australia.
Tonight, around the world there are tens of millions of families who have lost their jobs, lost their businesses, lost their homes and lost hope because of a crisis which was not of their own making, millions of working people around the world who, because of unrestrained and unregulated greed in financial markets, have been thrown out onto the streets.
If you want a definition of social injustice, this is it in living, brutal colour - millions of innocent workers losing their jobs because a few thousand financial executives around the world surrendered any pretence of social responsibility in their blind pursuit of absolute greed.
When this global financial crisis spread across the world, the Government knew Australia would not be immune. The Government knew we had a responsibility to protect working Australians and their families. The Government knew we had to act - and to act quickly.
So as the storms of the global financial crisis bore down upon Australia, the Government set out to build the strongest defences possible.
First, the Government guaranteed the savings in every Australian deposit account to underpin confidence and to prevent the run on the banks that we had seen around the world.
Second, the Government guaranteed inter-bank lending when credit flows ground to a complete halt, threatening to send good businesses to the wall.
Third, the Government provided three economic stimulus packages.
In the short term, the Government stimulated the economy with rapid cash stimulus to families, pensioners and low income earners, as well as a boost for first home buyers and an investment tax break for small businesses.
Over the medium term, the Government began investing in nation-building economic infrastructure - creating jobs today for people in every town and every suburb across the country while also creating the infrastructure our country needs for tomorrow.
This includes:
     * the biggest single investment in social housing in Australia's history;
     * the biggest single investment in domestic energy efficiency in Australian history;
     * the biggest school modernisation program in Australia's history, including:
         * state of the art libraries;
         * state of the art science centres;
         * state of the art language centres;
         * multi-purpose halls for schools and communities who at present may have no place to meet, and
         * state of the art classroom modernisation.
And over the longer term, nation-building infrastructure investments in rail, roads, ports, hospitals, universities, research institutes, clean energy projects and a national broadband network.
Finally, the Government has also invested in our Jobs and Training Compact - a detailed strategy to tackle unemployment in local communities launched with the Brotherhood five months ago in Narre Warren - to make a further difference to communities where unemployment was rising fastest.
These are the three core pillars of our economic intervention strategy: stabilising our financial system; supporting real jobs in the real economy through our infrastructure stimulus strategy; and further, a local skills, training and employment strategy to support those who have lost their jobs or who have been unable to enter the workforce.
This has been our strategy, and the strategy has been effective - effective so far in keeping Australia out of recession, the only advanced economy to do so.
Of course some said we were doing too much. Some said we were acting too fast. Some said we were doing the wrong things.
They said we should wait and see how bad things would get before taking action. They said we should keep our powder dry, and then presumably try to clean up the economic and social wreckage later, once the storm had ripped through the place.
The Government fundamentally disagreed with this do-nothing approach.
The Government decided to act immediately, decisively and without apology.
We weren't going to wait for a run on the banks as occurred in other countries when people panicked.
We weren't going to stand idly by while good businesses shut their doors because they were starved of credit.
We weren't going to wait until jobless numbers soared towards one million.
We weren't going to wait until the unemployment queues began snaking around the block outside every Centrelink Office.
Remember, this was the course of action advocated by our opponents.
Losing your job can be a crushing experience, personally, physically, psychologically and of course financially. Large scale unemployment also further undermines economic growth, prolongs the downturn, delays the recovery, and results in greater public borrowing as tax revenues collapse and unemployment benefits go through the roof.
That's why when this crisis hit, the Government was determined we would do all we could to protect Australian jobs from the global recession they did not cause.
And the result? Australia is doing better than other countries, with the strongest economic growth, the second lowest unemployment, the lowest debt and lowest deficit of all the Major Advanced Economies - and the only one not to go into recession.
We have achieved this through conservative economic management, expanding the role of government while the private sector is in retreat, and reducing the role of government as the private sector recovers.
And we have achieved this while maintaining strong Government finances - keeping our AAA Credit rating, our borrowings the lowest of the Major Advanced Economies and with a clear plan to return the budget to surplus as the economy recovers.
Neither I nor the Australian Government like debt. Nobody does.
But this was necessary to keep our economy going, necessary to prevent hundreds of thousands of Australians losing their jobs; and necessary to keep the economy from falling into recession.
And in their more honest moments, our political opponents have said they would have deployed 95 per cent of the Government's borrowings had they been in office.
With the economy starting to show signs of recovery, the Government's stimulus has already started to phase out - as it was designed to do. By the end of this financial year, two thirds of the total stimulus will have been spent.
The infrastructure stimulus which remains will continue to support jobs, tradies and small businesses until our economy fully recovers.
We must however keep a weather eye on the global economy where recovery is far from certain, and where economists still point to the possibility of a double dip recession. That is why, as the Treasurer has said repeatedly, we will continue to calibrate our fiscal settings, informed by changing economic circumstances, to ensure they are appropriate for emerging macroeconomic conditions.
That is why calls to end the stimulus are so irresponsible.
There are still uncertainties remaining in the global economy. Treasury has estimated that to entirely remove the fiscal support from the economy at once, would reduce growth by 2.5 per cent in 2010.
Australia has managed the crisis well, and the Government has done so in response to the best Treasury advice.
So, too, must Australia manage the recovery well, and once again the Government will do so in response to the best Treasury advice - managing the coordinated exit from the extraordinary fiscal and monetary policy settings and financial market interventions that were demanded by the crisis, but doing so in a manner that does not pull the rug from under the recovery.
And furthermore, continuing to implement the most far-reaching microeconomic reform program in skills, infrastructure, tax, competition policy and regulation, to maximise Australia's long-term global economic competitiveness.
Many, many Australians have been doing it tough through this crisis, and while we've been fighting the global recession here in Australia, we've also been moving ahead with a long-term strategy to build both a stronger and a fairer Australia:
     * Introducing paid parental leave;
     * Tackling the challenges facing our health and hospitals system;
     * Tackling the scourge of homelessness;
     * Implementing the largest reform of our age pension in one hundred years;
     * Taking action to close the gap on Indigenous disadvantage.
And in addition to these nationwide social reforms, also targeting pockets of entrenched disadvantage across our community.
A few weeks ago, in discussing recent Australian economic history at Paul Kelly's book launch, I said that I do not believe that in Australia you can successfully advance an economic reform agenda without a complementary agenda for social reform.
In the long term, the goals of building a stronger economy and a fairer society are not in conflict.
We should not have to choose between faster growth and a fairer society, because unless the economic reform that underpins growth delivers benefits to the whole society, it won't have society's support and the momentum for reform will fall away.
Equally, unless we make a priority of tackling entrenched social disadvantage, our economy will be weaker, not stronger, because inequality and disadvantage contribute to poorer educational results, lower productivity, worse health outcomes, shorter working lives and lower workforce participation.
That's why the Government's agenda for building a stronger economy goes hand in hand with building a fairer society.
Lifting the quality of education in our most disadvantaged schools, mandatory school testing, transparent reporting of school results, lifting teacher quality - all delivering the long-run payoff of higher school retention rates, leading to higher productivity and workforce participation in the long term.
Likewise, advancing the preventative health agenda and tackling chronic disease will build a healthier workforce that will stay actively participating in work for longer.
As many in this room know from first hand experience, it is not easy tackling the complex challenges of closing the gap on Indigenous disadvantage, halving homelessness, or supporting families and building more resilient communities where there's been years of multiple disadvantage.
These reforms are not a simple replication of classical Left demands for infinitely greater public spending. Nor are they about neo-liberal claims that the only good state is a non-existent state (except of course when the state is called upon to rescue capitalism from itself).
No, the challenge of the responsible reforming centre of Australian politics is to harness personal responsibility with the support of the enabling state. To equip disadvantaged Australians with the capacity over time to take responsibility for their own lives, and to do so with programs which harness the combined resources and commitment of governments working wherever possible in creative partnership with the community sector and the private sector.
None of this is easy. If it was, it would all have been done long before now. The truth is it's hard - very hard.
But that's why it's worth doing - because the results are worthwhile.
Not pretending, and not putting it all into the too hard basket, but instead, rolling our sleeves up and having a go.
This long-term agenda of economic and social reform lies at the heart of the Government's vision for a stronger and fairer Australia.
After the Government came to office almost two years ago, we outlined our agenda to tackle the long-term causes of social disadvantage in Australia. We outlined our goal for all Australians to be able to participate fully in our nation's economic, social and community life.
This means more than just providing income support. It means that in tackling entrenched disadvantage in communities, we must act on:
     * the skills people have;
     * their family relationships;
     * the amenities available in their communities;
     * their opportunity to participate in work;
     * their readiness for work or training; and
     * the need to allow people to take responsibility for their own choices.
Analysis of the recent Australian Bureau of Statistics General Social Survey suggests that around 5 per cent of Australians experience multiple disadvantages. Such disadvantage includes low income and assets, low skills, difficulty finding and keeping a job, housing stress, poor health and lack of services. It can also include substance misuse, mental illness, disability, family violence, discrimination and homelessness.
As a community, we all pay a price when people are excluded from the mainstream of economic and social life. Social disadvantage results in:
     * costs to the Budget through:
     * increased health expenditures on preventable chronic disease and mental illness;
     * increased provision of cash support to those who are unable to work;
     * increased costs for policing, the courts and corrective services;
     * costs to the economy through lost productivity and workforce participation, and
     * costs to communities where disadvantage becomes entrenched and social isolation ensues.
In their recent book The Spirit Level, Richard Wilkinson and Kate Pickett argue that those nations committed to greater fairness do better on almost every major indicator of social and economic life. In other words, it is to the benefit of all Australians, not just disadvantaged Australians, that we do the hard work of tackling entrenched disadvantage.
In confronting this challenge, the Government has adopted a set of guiding Social Inclusion Principles with the aim of:
     * increasing social, civic and economic participation;
     * giving individuals a greater voice, and
     * giving individuals greater responsibility.
These principles are now helping shape policy development and policy implementation across government.
The Government is working on a long-term blueprint for a more effective and integrated approach to tackling disadvantage, taking into account all the different ways that disadvantaged Australians interact with governments.
And with a long-term vision that an Australian child born today can hope for better health outcomes in the future; access to quality early learning; a better chance of success at school and beyond school; gaining better paid work, and contributing to their local community.
We all know that joblessness is at the heart of entrenched disadvantage.
That's why the Government has worked so hard to avoid a repeat of the early '90s, when a generation of young Australians was cast out to the fringes of the labour market through years of unemployment.
As Professor Tony Vinson found in his report Dropping Off the Edge, when you go to the 3 per cent of local communities where people are living with entrenched disadvantage, you find:
     * double the national unemployment rate;
     * more than double the rate of long-term unemployment;
     * almost double the rate of disability support and psychiatric admissions and criminal convictions;
     * almost three times the rate of imprisonment; and
     * more than three times the proportion of confirmed child maltreatment than other remaining localities.
That's why this year we appointed local employment coordinators in 20 priority regions across Australia - working with local businesses, unions, community organisations, schools, training providers and job services to maximise training and employment opportunities -- including through the Jobs Fund.
Those coordinators are on the ground, bringing local communities together and helping to link individual job seekers with employment opportunities.
Young people are particularly at risk during a period of rising joblessness. That is why we implemented the Compact with Young Australians, which guarantees young Australians a place at study or in work.
That's why we also implemented a Compact with Retrenched Workers to support those Australians who have lost their jobs in recent months - helping more than 28,000 retrenched workers to receive immediate advice and access to employment services. And that's why we implemented a Compact with Local Communities, supported by our network of Local Employment Coordinators.
All three make up our Jobs and Training Compact for all Australians in response to the global economic crisis.
Tonight I'd like to announce new measures the Australian Government will be taking to tackle social disadvantage - both aimed at enhancing personal responsibility, both to be delivered in partnership with the community sector and the private sector.
Both therefore bringing together the framework of social reform I have outlined this evening - one aimed at breaking welfare dependency, building personal responsibility and resilience, and delivered through the non-government sector, thereby liberating them from the often less flexible delivery systems of the state itself.
Through Jenny Macklin's portfolio we will be providing $33 million in support for two innovative partnership schemes.
The first of these, with the Brotherhood of St Laurence, involves the SaverPlus scheme that helps low income Australians save for an education-related goal.
BSL has developed this scheme in partnership with the ANZ Bank, which has provided matching savings and loan capital, and the use of its banking infrastructure and expertise.
It is a scheme with runs on the board. An evaluation of the SaverPlus scheme by RMIT has showed that two to three years after completing the scheme, 70 per cent of participants are still saving at the same rate.
To support and expand the coverage of the SaverPlus matched savings scheme, the Commonwealth will commit $14.5 million to employ SaverPlus project workers in 60 communities, reaching up to 7,600 people, with financial education as a compulsory component of the program. We will also be supporting a pilot of a market interest rate loan product for people who have otherwise been excluded from mainstream credit, called Progress Loans.
The second scheme the Government will be supporting is the No Interest Loan Scheme (NILS) conducted by Good Shepherd Youth and Family Services.
Through this scheme since 1980, Good Shepherd has provided thousands of vulnerable Australians with the opportunity to purchase essential household items, such as fridges and washing machines. At the same time, the scheme connects loan applicants with services to assist them, irrespective of whether they are awarded a loan.
The scheme's repayment rates of around 97 per cent speak volumes for the commitment of the participants to do the right thing and for the robustness of the scheme.
The Australian Government will be investing $18.5 million in this scheme, to support Good Shepherd conducting 22,000 financial consultations in up to 350 locations, and facilitating an additional 7,200 loans. In addition, Good Shepherd's Step Up and Adds Up programs will provide low interest and matched savings opportunities for people on low incomes.
I acknowledge the important contribution of the National Australia Bank (NAB) to Good Shepherd's work, providing loan and matching capital, as well as logistical support.
These initiatives are an important part of our response to the global recession and its impact on Australians who have been doing it tough, and they are good examples of two of our major banks fulfilling their social contract and supporting financial resilience in communities across Australia.
To tackle all of these challenges effectively, we must all work together.
This Government is dedicated to building a stronger Australia, a fairer Australia, and an Australia with its sleeves rolled up ready to tackle the challenges of the long-term future. That is why the Government's relationship with the community sector is so important.
In the relationship between the Government and the community sector, may the Government embody a new philosophy in which:
     * the era of partisanship is over, and
     * the age of partnership has arrived.
This Government is planning to reflect this partnership soon in a new national compact -- a compact between the Australian Government and the not for profit sector, outlining how we will work together to improve and strengthen our relationship, now and into the future.
In Australia we have a unique opportunity as we emerge from the global recession to develop a national vision for a stronger and fairer Australia.
We are just emerging from the worst global recession since the Great Depression. As a government, we believe we learnt something from the lessons of the Great Depression.
As an institution, the BSL was born out of the human scars of the Great Depression. We are therefore both steeled by our historical experience, informed by the appalling economic and social cost that comes with global crisis, and thus fortified in dealing with the challenges of the future, and now we both face the new challenges of a new century - modern challenges which nonetheless call forth ancient values. Ancient values grounded equally in individual freedom and compassion for all.
To paraphrase author Paul Kelly, beyond being a nation of 'hard heads' and 'soft hearts' - what we most need now is 'capable hands'.
To renew the great Australian commitment to the fair go.
A fair go for all.
A fair go for the 21st century.
A stronger and fairer Australia for the 21st century. 


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
I'm delighted to launch Professor Garnaut's book today.
Not just because it's an important early assessment of the causes of the global financial crisis, but also because Ross has been spilling red ink on my own work for a quarter century - since the days in the Embassy in Beijing when he was Ambassador to the People's Republic of China, and I was First Secretary and tasked with the critical responsibility of doing the embassy photocopying.
So today I've finally got the chance to mark his homework - or at least respectfully to reflect upon it.
It's chance also to even up the score from some of my less than spectacular days when the Australian Embassy would play cricket against other assorted embassy teams - most especially the Poms.
Ross, correctly, has reflected on the fact that while I exhibited great enthusiasm for the game, I rarely troubled the scorers.
The Peking Cricket Club wasn't exactly like the Gabba - instead of bowling from the Stanley Street end or the Vulture Street end, we'd be bowling from either the Temple of Heaven end, or the Long Live Marxism Leninism Mao Zedong Thought end.
My preference was the latter - but I say that by way of self-disclosure in case a journalist from The Australian happens upon it in a further expose of my Chinese communist connections.
I was however made wicketkeeper on the robust assumption that there was a limit to the amount of damage I could cause there.
Alas, this assumption was again misplaced, as I soon became (affectionately, I hope) known as "iron gloves".
Ross, by contrast, had a confidence in his stroke play that marked him as a natural - and as a sandgroper extraordinaire, this perversely was expected of him.
But after Ross's successes on the pitch, today I relish the chance to even up the score.
Ross Garnaut is of course one of the architects of the modern Australian economy. Ross is also one of Australia's foremost public economists, and his early work on the Australia-China economic relationship was a decade ahead of its time.
As economic adviser to Prime Minister Bob Hawke from 1983 to 1985, he helped build the framework for the opening up of the Australian economy.
As Ambassador to China, nearly a quarter of a century ago he pioneered China's first significant foreign equity investment in a resource project anywhere in the world - the Channar mine in Western Australia - with the prescient assumption that it would be good for both economies if we began integrating our energy and resource industries with China's long-term energy and resource needs.
He then sought to expand this concept into the future of our two steel industries, and then to wool and textiles.
Ross then added to this already significant national contribution through his important work on climate change - the Garnaut Report - which has been an integral part of the Government's decision making process on the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme.
Ross has served successive governments of all persuasions. He's always maintained his academic rigour, a strong independent voice and an overriding sense of public service, and as The Great Crash of 2008 demonstrates, Ross has a masterful capacity to synthesise matters of great complexity into a clear and compelling narrative.
It is of course only just a year since the collapse of Lehman Brothers, the largest bankruptcy in history. The events of that weekend of September 13-14 2008 took us the edge of the abyss.
Two fundamental factual points have characterised this crisis - points which should continue to frame all our analysis.
The first is that this crisis was no ordinary crisis. In fact, it has been the most severe global economic event in our lifetime. On both financial and economic metrics, early stages of the current global crisis rivaled the severity of the Great Depression.
Consider these comparisons:
Global stock markets fell by just over 20 per cent in the first 12 months of the Great Depression. In the first 12 months of this recession, global stock markets fell by nearly twice that - more than 40 per cent off their peak.
Global industrial output fell by around 13 per cent in the first 12 months of the Great Depression - almost identical to the fall experienced from in this recession from the peak in April 2008.
Global trade fell by 10 per cent in the first 12 months of the Great Depression. This time it fell by 17 per cent.
There is still considerable uncertainty about how the global recession will unfold and how quickly the global recovery will occur, but on these metrics at least, it began with the same force and violence as the Great Depression three quarters of a century ago.
As Ben Bernanke and others have indicated, the incoming economic data in the first months of 2009 forecast the potential for an extraordinarily deep and protracted global downturn.
The second factual characteristic is that the magnitude of the crisis has also dictated the magnitude of the response that has been necessary on the part of governments.
It required unprecedented interventions in financial markets and in the real economy, amounting to over 16 trillion US dollars in fiscal, monetary and financial policy support from G20 economies, the equivalent to 24 per cent of global GDP. Collectively, these government policy actions - fiscal, monetary and financial - amount to the largest and most coordinated government stimulus strategy in modern economic history, and the crisis demanded such measures, as the chapter on 'Depression Economics' makes clear.
Again, the size of these interventions was matched only by the scale of the threat.
So are there any early conclusions we can draw from the crisis in terms of its causes, and how to avoid such crises in the future, and how to deal most effectively with such crises in the future should they re-occur?
For his part, Ross has got his own analysis in early, weaving together four strands of causation:
     * the cycle of boom and bust in economies;
     * the impact of global imbalances;
     * the excessive complexity of financial derivatives and financial markets (the clever money thesis), and
     * the greed of the corporate sector, especially of financial markets.
Of course there have been some earlier and more modest contributions to the debate - including my own - and as Ross will attest, those contributions aren't the first time that I've exceeded a word limit.
I have argued that unfettered markets, particularly financial markets, are inherently unstable. This is not a novel insight, but it is one that has been ignored at various times in modern history, often with devastating consequences.
In recent decades, economists began to believe in what some called the "Great Moderation" - a remarkable period of sustained growth in output, trade and living standards around the world which coexisted with low inflation and reduced volatility in asset prices. Some economists declared that the business cycle had been conquered and that financial markets were inherently efficient.
This crisis has exposed the efficient markets hypothesis and contrasted it with the essential Keynesian insight that markets, especially financial markets, are inherently unstable and subject to the whims of sentiment.
Keynes was prudently sceptical of unfettered financial markets and warned that "when the capital development of a country becomes a by-product of the activities of a casino, the job is likely to be ill-done."
A second conclusion from the current crisis is that the global recession would have been much worse without global government intervention.
In short, the lesson is that global Government intervention can work. Governments can make a significant difference if they coordinate to act rapidly, decisively and effectively.
History offers us many examples of where government responses to economic crises have been too slow and too weak.
In the 1930s governments responded to the financial crisis by retreating from the global economy. Government budgets were cut - withdrawing stimulus from the economy and compounding the weakness in the private sector. Tariff walls were raised, choking off international trade. Monetary stimulus was too passive.
The experience of the Great Depression allowed Keynes to deliver his core insight that market economies cannot function without governments playing a balancing role - to step in when the private sector is in retreat.
At various times, Keynes' insight has been lost. Culminating in President Ronald Reagan's pronouncement that "Government is the problem", opponents of the Keynesian tradition have argued that free markets are the lesser of two evils, where the alternative is onerous government regulations that suffocate enterprise and stifle innovation.
The crisis has taught us that this is a false choice. Effective regulation makes markets stronger. Indeed, effective regulation is essential to ensure that our markets operate fairly and freely.
As Ross says, we need to avoid a future crash by finding the right balance of economic management, financial regulation and free markets.
A third conclusion from this crisis is that the global economy is increasingly interconnected.
Global economic shocks reverberate around the world as weaknesses in one part of the world spread rapidly across the globe. As Ross says in his book, one of the primary mechanisms of this interconnection is the internationalisation of financial markets.
Over the last decade the value of financial derivative products issued around the world has reached one quadrillion dollars - that is one thousand million million.
Ross quotes former New York Federal Reserve President Gerald Corrigan who said in 2007 of the burgeoning financial derivative products:
"Anyone who thinks they understand this stuff is living in la la land."
The growing interconnectedness of the global economy underlines the importance of globally coordinated responses to economic events. That is why the emergence of the G20 leaders process as the primary global economic forum is important - a forum where Australia now has a permanent seat at the table.
In re-examining the global financial crisis, Ross also underscores the remarkable strength of Australia's economic performance compared to the Major Advanced Economies:
     * the only economy not to go into recession;
     * the second lowest unemployment rate of the Major Advanced Economies, and
     * the lowest debt and lowest deficit of all the Major Advanced Economies.
And we have achieved this while maintaining strong public finances - keeping our AAA credit rating, keeping our borrowings lower than any of the major advanced economies and laying out a clear plan to return the budget to surplus as the economy recovers.
These outcomes are the result of many factors, but government policy settings have played a critical but not exclusive role.
Our economic intervention strategy reflected three core pillars.
First, stabilising our financial system, in particular through the timely provision of the guarantees for bank deposits and wholesale bank borrowings. Our banks weren't without their problems, and the book shows that decisive action in providing guarantees for wholesale funding made the difference.
Second, supporting real jobs in the real economy through our stimulus strategy with its focus on investing in productive infrastructure.
Third, a local skills, training and employment strategy to support those who have lost their jobs or who have been unable to enter the workforce.
This intervention strategy has served us well during the past 12 months. It has helped cushion the economy from the severe global downturn, saving hundreds of thousands of Australians from losing their jobs.
It is worth noting that in devising the Government's stimulus strategy, we were guided by Treasury advice on what worked and what did not when Australia wrestled with the recessions of the early '90s.
Mindful of these painful lessons, and through economic history of the more searing pain of the Great Depression half a century before, we were steeled by the experiences of the past, and the economic and human costs of high and sustained levels of unemployment. But as Ross makes clear, there are many challenges ahead.
Those challenges include the prospect of a long and slow recovery in the developed countries, while also dealing with the long-term slide in productivity growth, the decline in Australia's terms of trade, and what Ross describes as the "substantial structural deficit" inherited from the previous Government, after the squandering of the revenue gains from the mining boom.
An important feature of The Great Crash of 2008 is that it doesn't just look to the events of the past. It also looks to the future.
Ross cites many reasons why the road ahead won't be smooth.
Overcoming the large imbalances in the global economy will be an enormous challenge as we move into recovery. This point was reinforced by Chairman Bernanke in his remarks last weekend - and I quote:
As the global economy recovers and trade volumes rebound, however, global imbalances may reassert themselves... policymakers around the world must guard against such an outcome. We understand, at least in principle, how to do this... [but] just as increasing private saving in the United States is challenging, promoting consumption in a high-saving country is not necessarily straightforward."
US Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke, 
"Asia and the Global Financial Crisis", 19 October 2009
Adjusting from these profound global imbalances from the past will not be easy. As Ross notes, major structural changes in the global economy will be inevitable. And inevitably, they will be hard.
Another challenge is the risk of a return to protectionism around the world as domestic industries struggle under the weight of tighter credit conditions, constrained consumption and consequently weaker growth. Protection is always the cheap card to play at time of economic difficulty - cheap politics, disastrous economics and with appalling consequences for trade, growth and employment.
As someone who helped drive trade liberalisation in past decades, Ross understands the importance of free trade to sustainable global growth and long-term prosperity.
As I have argued in many forums both here and abroad, it is fundamental that the global downturn does not lead nations to raise their barriers to trade, as happened in the 1930s.
Another challenge arises from governments around the world exiting from their current large ownership stakes in their financial systems. This process will not be easy, given the importance of sustaining confidence in the stability of financial institutions.
As Ross notes, Australia has been spared the need to rescue our banking institutions by direct budgetary provisions. Indeed, of the nine 'AA' rated banks in the world at the moment, four of them are Australian.
Australia has nonetheless been active within the G20 in developing coordinated policy positions to harmonise the exit over time from the extraordinary financial market interventions including sovereign guarantees of term funding.
Related to the challenge of withdrawal from extraordinary financial market interventions is the parallel global challenge for governments to exit over time from the extraordinary fiscal stimulus that has been necessary to keep the global economy going during a recession, and to reduce global public debt.
Large fiscal deficits around the world (averaging nearly 10 per cent of GDP across the OECD) are a significant part of the global imbalances which must be addressed if the global economy is to move towards a path of long-term sustainable growth.
Again, Australia is better placed than most other nations, with the lowest debt and deficit of the Major Advanced Economies. We nevertheless face a challenging period of adjustment in the years ahead, with lower terms of trade than in recent years, and the prospects of a weak global recovery.
The Australian Government has established a clear set of fiscal rules that will see Australia return to budget surplus - by holding real growth in spending to 2 per cent per annum once recovery has been confirmed and allowing tax revenues to recover.
This fiscal consolidation strategy was outlined in the Budget. We intend to adhere to it.
It will be tough. And it is unlikely to be popular.
It means no return to the lazy days of the mining boom, when the Liberals spent almost all of the additional revenue from the commodity boom, some $314 billion of the $334 billion windfall revenue.
$314 billion dollars, with almost none of it on investment to drive future productivity growth, all about unsustainable short-term consumption, not productive long-term investment. The great opportunities of the boom years were squandered, while the nation's need for investment in education and infrastructure to turbo-charge the next generation of productivity growth were ignored.
Ross has referred to this period as the "Great Australian Complacency of the Early 21st Century".[1] The four years from 2004-05 to 2007-08 witnessed the largest expansion in Commonwealth government spending since the recession of the early 1990s.
What is remarkable is that this spending increase occurred when economic growth was strong and the economy was not in need of stimulus.
Reversing the unsustainable spending of the boom years will require many difficult choices, as opposed to sustaining the pro-cyclical fiscal policy settings of our predecessors from 2003 to 2007, when the public revenue was awash from the proceeds of the global mining boom.
The Government's objective is to entrench Australia's current globally competitive position for the future, with world-class skills, world-class infrastructure, world-class knowledge industries, world-class resource and energy sectors and world-leading macroeconomic management credentials.
Professor Garnaut's book also adds to the important debate on the future role of government in the market economy. As I have noted in my earlier remarks, I believe the crisis has fundamentally discredited the neo-liberal ideology that said markets would always be self-correcting.
Ross questions some of the different labels applied to various schools of economic thought in this debate. As I have said since my first speech in this place more than a decade ago, open markets at home and abroad are the most powerful and efficient generators of long-term economic growth, employment and prosperity.
But as I also said in both my maiden speech and a decade later in The Monthly, markets also fail.
The best model for government in our time is that of the enabling state:
     * maximising the opportunities for enterprise and initiative;
     * maximising productive growth by investing in the great productivity drivers of education and infrastructure;
     * reducing the tax and regulatory impediments to business;
     * enhancing competition policy at home and open markets abroad;
     * and all the while, acting decisively on market failure when it occurs rather than indulging in the ideological self-delusion that it has not.
Ross has been a core player in the open market tradition of the Hawke and Keating governments: on exchange rate policy; on interest rate policy; on dismantling the walls of protectionism.
This is a tradition that has simultaneously advanced both economic and social reform, a tradition that helped workers to re-train and up-skill when their industries were affected by the phasing out of tariffs, and that delivered the social wage, universal health care and the expansion of our university system, while building a sophisticated, internationalised and globally competitive economy.
The Hawke and Keating governments understood that prosecuting an economic reform agenda without a social reform agenda dooms both to failure. They showed that you could build a strong economy while also building a decent society, that in managing our economy, we do not need to make a choice between extremes - the invisible hand of market forces, or the dead hand of state socialism.
Or as I have said before, there are more options than just choosing between Friedrich Hayek and Leonid Brezhnev.
The challenge now is to get the lessons of the crisis right - neither to ignore the need for effective market regulation, nor lurch back to heavy-handed state paternalism.
The new reforming centre of politics must bring together the power of market forces to unleash incentive and innovation, provide a fair go for all and address market failures through the agency of the state.
The Government that I lead stands proudly in this reform tradition of past Labor governments. As I've said before, still borrowing from Paul Kelly, a government and a nation of hard heads, soft hearts - and most critically, one of enabling hands.
Congratulations to Professor Garnaut and to David Llewellyn-Smith for an authoritative and accessible account of what history might ultimately judge as the single most significant economic event of our lifetimes. It's also a great read.
Congratulations also to Louise Adler and Melbourne University Publishing. Your imprint is an increasingly familiar item on the bookshelves of discerning readers.
I am delighted today to launch The Great Crash of 2008.
On balance, Ross, I give it a Distinction. For the government at large, I'd be happy if we were to be awarded a Credit.
Ross - well done on a timely and important volume. I hope your sales in Australia and throughout the world contribute to the nation's economic recovery and export revenues in the months ahead.


It of course has been a great pleasure to welcome Prime Minister Gruevski to Canberra today.
We have just signed documents to conclude a social security agreement that will make retirement easier for up to 4,000 residents of both countries. From 2011, when the agreement is expected to commence, people who have spent part of their adult lives in Australia and the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia will have access to pensions from both countries.
This agreement reflects the close people-to-people links that we have between our countries, and it is the first formal agreement concluded between our two countries since the establishment of diplomatic relations 14 years ago, in October of 1995.
Today, the Prime Minister and I have just had a working lunch, where we discussed the impact of the global economic crisis and our shared commitments to assisting Afghanistan at this difficult time. Both our nations are democracies and both our nations are committed to making a strong contribution to international affairs.
The Prime Minister is a welcome guest in our country and I am pleased that we have been able to conclude this agreement here today in honour of his visit, and I would ask the Prime Minister to make some remarks.
Thank you.



CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
Tonight I want to discuss a core element of our nation's long term infrastructure reform.
One that has been part of our national economic policy debate for many decades.
One that is critical to achieving our goals of lifting productivity, tackling climate change and improving the lives of millions of Australians.
I refer to the future planning of our major cities.
The Government in the months ahead will release a new Intergenerational Report.
One of its key conclusions is that by 2049, Australia's population will rise by 60 per cent to reach a total of 35 million people.
This will have enormous implications for our major cities.
Most of these 35 million people will live in our cities.
By 2049, Sydney and Melbourne will each hold almost seven million people - adding around three million to their current populations.
Brisbane will more than double in size to reach four million.
Perth will reach almost three and a half million.
Adelaide will grow to over one and a half million.
Hobart, Darwin, and Canberra will also continue to expand.
Australia's rapid population growth will have profound implications for our destiny as a nation.
The century ahead stands to be the greatest century of economic growth and nation-building in Australian history.
I have said before that I believe in a big Australia.
This is good for our national security.
Good for our long-term prosperity.
Good in enhancing our role in the region and the world.
The time to prepare for this big Australia is now.
But managing that population growth will be challenging.
The Intergenerational Report will lay out the challenges posed by this growth.
These challenges underscore the need for national leadership in planning the future of our cities.
Tonight, here in the nation's largest city, I will set out the first steps in the Australian Government's vision for national leadership in the growth and development of our major cities.
First, I would like to make some general remarks on Australia's economic outlook.
As you know, it is now just over 12 months since the Australian Government took action in response to the global financial crisis and the worldwide collapse in economic growth.
On both financial and economic metrics, early stages of the current global crisis rival the severity of the Great Depression.
- Global stock markets fell by just over 20 per cent in the first 12 months of the Great Depression. In the first 12 months of this recession, global stock markets fell by nearly twice that - more than 40 per cent off their peak.
- Global industrial output fell by around 13 per cent in the first 12 months of the Great Depression - almost identical to the fall experienced in this recession from the peak in April 2008.
- Global trade fell by 10 per cent in the first 12 months of the Great Depression. This time it fell by 17 per cent.
There is still considerable uncertainty about how the global recession will unfold and how quickly the global recovery will occur.
But a comparison of these two periods shows the current global crisis began with the same force as the Great Depression three quarters of a century ago.
Direct and decisive government action around the world during the past year has pulled financial markets and the global economy back from the abyss.
Global financial markets are recovering.
The spread on the LIBOR rate - the interest that banks charge when lending to each other compared to the risk free rate - has come down from around 365 basis points at the peak of the crisis to around 13 basis points today.
Global stockmarkets have recovered strongly since their lowest point in March this year.
The Dow Jones Index in the US has since risen by 54 percent, and the Australian All Ordinaries index is now up 56 per cent.
The real economy is also showing some signs of improvement.
Due to the combined efforts of the G20 to stimulate the global economy, the global recession is now expected to be shallower than previously expected.
Recovery is still a long way off, but the IMF is now projecting a contraction of 1.1 per cent in the global economy this year - while just three months ago in July it had forecast a contraction of 1.4 per cent.
Remember, however, this year will be the first year since the IMF began keeping records that the global economy will actually contract.
Likewise, the IMF has lifted its global growth forecast for 2010 from 2.5 per cent to 3.1 per cent.
Australia has acted strongly and decisively at home to complement this global action on financial markets and stimulus to support the real economy.
Australia has shown remarkable strength compared to the Major Advanced Economies:
- We are the only advanced economy to have registered positive economic growth in the past year.
- Second, we have the second lowest unemployment rate of the Major Advanced Economies.
- Third, we have the lowest budget deficit of all the Major Advanced Economies, at 4.9 per cent of GDP, compared to a forecast average deficit in the Major Advanced Economies of 10.1 per cent of GDP in 2009.
- Fourth, we have the lowest debt of all the Major Advanced Economies. Government net debt as a share of GDP for the major advanced economies is projected to increase to 93.4 per cent. By contrast, Australia's net debt is projected to peak at 13.8 per cent of GDP in 2013-14, before it starts to fall again as our economy moves into a strong period of growth.
- Fifth, we are the only advanced economy not to go into recession.
These are the cold hard statistical facts which are unlikely to feature in the Liberals' campaign advertisements next year on the evils of debt and deficits.
The alternative to the Government's stimulus strategy would have been to plunge the economy into recession - with more than one million unemployed and with crippling consequences for business and consumer confidence.
Furthermore, consistent with the principles of conservative economic management, the Government has expanded its role as the private economy has contracted, and will contract the role of government as and when the private economy recovers.
The most fashionable recent contribution to this debate by some in the commentariat is that the Government should now abandon its fiscal stimulus - an argument that often comes from those who argued that the Government's stimulus strategy would be ineffective in the first place.
This represents the triumph of ideology over reason.
It ignores three fundamental facts.
- First, the path to global recovery is still far from certain - as confirmed recently by my counterparts at both the G20 in Pittsburgh last month and at the East Asia Summit on the weekend in Thailand.
- Second, the pattern of the Australian economic recovery is itself less than even.
- Third, the Government's stimulus strategy, 70 per cent of which is being invested in economic and social infrastructure, is precisely what stimulus strategies are intended to be - timely, targeted and temporary.
By the end of the current financial year, two thirds of this stimulus will have been invested.
In fact, the intensity of our intervention peaked in the second quarter of 2009.
By early 2010, the inbuilt contraction within our strategy, as designed from the start, will already be making a negative contribution to GDP growth.
Nevertheless, the Government remains mindful of the need to make any future adjustments depending on further global and national economic data.
Our economy is expected to operate below capacity for some time, and unemployment is still expected to rise.
Australia has managed the crisis well.
Our next challenge is to manage the recovery.
That means making a careful, coordinated exit from the extraordinary fiscal and monetary policy settings and financial market interventions that the crisis demanded.
That is what we intend to do - and in a manner that does not weaken the prospects for recovery.
The Reserve Bank has begun to move interest rates from their emergency 50 year lows.
As for fiscal consolidation, this will unfold in two parts.
The automatic drawdown of our stimulus strategy combined with the fiscal rules outlined in May, to return the budget to surplus - by keeping real expenditure growth to 2 per cent once trend growth has returned to the economy, and by allowing tax revenues to recover.
But beyond disciplined macroeconomic policy, central to our agenda for recovery and future prosperity is the Government's commitment to drive future productivity growth.
In addressing the Business Council almost three years ago, in my first major address as the Federal Labor Leader, Building Long Term Prosperity, I said that, "the new battleground for economic policy must now focus on the microeconomic debate and specifically, how we raise flagging productivity growth".[1]
We have been advancing this agenda since coming to office, through:
- The creation of a seamless national economy, collapsing 27 sets of conflicting regulations into a streamlined set of uniform rules. Four of these 27 reform areas will be substantially complete by the end of the year, and almost all of the remainder are on track to meet agreed milestones. 
- A qualitative and quantitative education revolution. 
- Productivity-enhancing infrastructure investment by both the public and private sectors. 
- A communications revolution through a National Broadband Network. 
- And maximising our global competitiveness through targeted tax reform.
Tonight I want to focus on the role of our cities in our agenda to build long-term productivity growth.
The previous government vacated the field on future planning for our major cities.
More broadly, the previous government vacated the field on infrastructure per se - as this was passed off as the responsibility of the states, despite their financial and in many cases planning constraints.
There was a failure of planning, a failure of coordination, a failure of investment and a failure in service delivery.
The BCA is well aware of the shortcomings in our nation's infrastructure planning and development, and this was a focus of the 2005 Infrastructure Action Plan for Future Prosperity.
The Government that I lead was elected to tackle the challenge of providing national leadership for long-term infrastructure planning and investment.
It is my intention to get on with the job.
As Minister Albanese said in August, "the Commonwealth's recent exile from the urban policy arena has ended".
That is why we are taking the next step in setting out the Australian Government's reform agenda for our nation's cities.
An agenda that does not supplant the essential roles of the States, Territories and local authorities, but which builds a new national partnership for better planning and productivity, and a better quality of city and suburban life.
Around the world, nations are grappling with the challenge of planning for the cities of the future.
The forces of the global economy are driving rapid urban growth and requiring governments to re-think their approach to the planning and development of cities.
Last year, with very little comment, the world passed a remarkably significant milestone.
For the first time in world history, a majority of humans now live in cities and towns rather than rural areas.
In other words, we have tipped the scales and become an urban planet.
Or as the United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon says, we have entered the Urban Century.
Cities today are essential to the prosperity of our national economy.
They produce a large share of the goods, services, ideas and people that shape our world.
In many ways the competition for investment, skilled workers, international events and for business now occurs between cities, rather than countries.
Because cities are now so vital to economic success and to citizens' well-being, national governments are now playing a much greater role in planning and delivering growth.
That's why when the Government took office, we moved quickly to establish Infrastructure Australia and within it a Major Cities Unit.
Just this month, the British Government launched the Infrastructure Planning Commission to make sure the UK has strong power, water and transport systems in its cities.
And in February, weeks after taking office, President Obama established a White House Office of Urban Affairs to oversee what he described as a "reinvention of all America's cities and metropolitan areas''.
As the OECD's 2006 Report on Competitive Cities in the Global Economy argues, national economic strategy can no longer ignore the characteristics of cities that shape economic performance, social cohesion and environmental conditions.
The report adds, and I quote:
"National urban policies in the past have been reactive and remedial, not pro-active and dynamic. Urban issues (must) be given greater visibility and higher priority in national policy...''
Since coming to office, the Government has established a framework for national leadership on the infrastructure of the future.
We have made unprecedented investments in infrastructure, water, housing, education and energy.
We made a historic $35.8 billion investment in transport infrastructure.
We are the first national government to invest significantly in urban passenger rail infrastructure -- with more than $4.6 billion of funds.
We have invested substantial funds in our nation's capital cities:
- an upgrade of the rail freight route north of Sydney; upgrading the F5 from Campbelltown; and undertaking pre-construction works on a 25 kilometre metro rail line from Parramatta to the CBD;
- an upgrade of the Ipswich Motorway to relieve congestion to and from Brisbane's industrial hub;
- Melbourne's Regional Rail Express, the first major new rail line for the city in 80 years;
- Adelaide's busy Gawler rail line; extending the Noarlunga line to Seaford and extending the innovative guided busway, the O-Bahn;
- Perth's Northbridge rail project that will sink a section of the Perth-to-Fremantle line, freeing up 50,000 square metres of land in the heart of Perth; and
- a major expansion and upgrade of the Port of Darwin and upgrading Tiger Brennan Drive.
This is a substantial increase in investment in transport infrastructure compared with the previous Government.
All up, our Government is investing more than double the previous government on road infrastructure.
Quadruple the amount in rail infrastructure.
And for the first time, the Commonwealth is making an investment in the nation's port infrastructure.
In total, these and other investments represent a massive commitment to Australian cities, and to the regional economies that support them.
The reason why we are making these investments is simple.
The future of our cities will substantially shape the future of our nation.
Australia, famously, is one of the most urbanised nations on earth.
The nation that once rode on the sheep's back now rides on the M2, M4 and M5 into Sydney and on the Epping, Lilydale and Werribee lines into Melbourne.
- Nearly two-thirds of Australians live in our capital cities.
- Nearly 85 per cent of Australians live in an urban area.
- And nearly half of all Australians - or nearly 11 million people - live in Sydney, Melbourne or the great city of Brisbane.
- In 2006 our capital cities produced at least 65 per cent of national GDP.
- And more than two-thirds of new jobs are created in capital cities.
Capital cities are the hubs of our innovation economy, gateways to the global economy and the centres of our road, rail and broadband networks. 
Nearly two-thirds of the value of international sea freight is handled through a major city port.
And more than 80 per cent of international passenger movements take place through Sydney, Melbourne or Brisbane airports.
Cities connect our farms, mines and rural areas to world markets.
They often hold the corporate headquarters of regionally-based companies.
One of the mistakes in debates about infrastructure and planning is thinking that cities and regional areas are in competition and governments must choose to favour either cities or the regions.
Having spent most of my early years growing up in country Australia, and most of the past three decades in different cities, I'm convinced this is a myth.
The prosperity of urban, suburban and regional Australia are strongly interlinked.
The prosperity of both our cities and regions depend on each other, so that planning for the separate needs of regional Australia and metropolitan Australia is in the interests of the whole nation.
Transport bottlenecks in our cities can undermine the competitiveness of exports from our regions.
Just as poor regional water infrastructure can raise prices for the fresh food consumed in our cities.
That is why tackling the future challenges of our major cities is so important to our nation's long-term prosperity.
The investments we have made represent only the first steps in meeting the challenges of the future for our major cities.
We must now move forward to tackle the three key challenges of the future for our major cities:
- Building productive cities - with efficient transport and communications networks;
- Building affordable, liveable city communities; and 
- Building sustainable cities.
The first of these areas - building productive cities - describes how cities link people to jobs, goods to transport and to ports, and businesses to research and development clusters, supply chains and customers.
Better transport connections bring people and firms together. They concentrate knowledge, skills and inventiveness to create new economic opportunities.
In other words, they enhance connectivity.
To quote Sir Rod Eddington, chair of the United Kingdom's 2006 Eddington Transport Study and now chair of Infrastructure Australia:
"Good transport systems support the productivity of urban areas, supporting deep and productive labour markets... Transport corridors are the arteries of domestic and international trade.''
Sir Rod's study is supported by leading British economist Professor Tony Venables, who found that cutting travel time in Britain by just 10 per cent could raise national productivity by as much as 1.2 per cent.
But cutting congestion and travel time is about more than just trying to increase national productivity and GDP.
It is also about giving people the chance to spend more time with their friends and families, helping the kids with homework or playing sport - rather than sitting in a traffic jam on congested roads.
These things are not necessarily reflected in GDP numbers, but they are of great importance to our quality of life.
In Australian cities, bottlenecks in our rail and port systems are also imposing huge financial costs on our exporters and on businesses in general.
It is estimated that road congestion by 2005 was contributing an avoidable cost of $9.4 billion.
And if we fail to act, that cost will double in the next decade.
One of the factors driving the increased reliance on road usage is the long-term underinvestment in public transport networks.
In many places, those networks are under great pressure.
And in some of our suburbs, especially on the fringe, they're simply missing.
Despite all that, public transport use in our cities is growing at a faster rate than car use.
Our second great urban challenge is to build affordable, liveable cities.
For many Australians, the problem of housing affordability has become acute in recent years.
Of course there has been some relief recently with lower interest rates and the First Home Owners Boost.
We established the Housing Affordability Fund to help reduce the costs of new homes by tackling the barriers developers face in supplying affordable housing.
Through COAG, we are developing national performance measures for Development Assessment to improve transparency and accountability for planning systems.
Nevertheless, we still face the challenge of not enough new housing being built and affordability remaining a significant problem.
That is why we are increasing the housing supply through our investment in social housing and the National Rental Affordability Scheme.
In making cities more liveable, as well as more affordable, we must ensure that communities are not separated from jobs and services. 
Isolated communities breed social exclusion and entrenched disadvantage.
Urban planning is therefore an important part of the long term agenda to build a fairer Australia.
Increasing density in cities is part of the solution to urban growth, alongside greenfield development.
Both forms of development need to be fully integrated with current and future transport networks and other infrastructure and services.
The third great urban challenge is to build sustainable cities.
I have said before that climate change requires a whole of government response - including both adaptation and mitigation.
Climate change is another reason why the national government must be engaged in cities policies.
Directly and indirectly, cities make up an estimated 70 per cent of Australia's greenhouse gas output.
Cities face major challenges from the impact of climate change, as do our regions.
We must make long-term investments in transport networks that minimise carbon emissions.
We must prepare for fresh water supplies coming under increasing pressure.
Building practices and regulations will need to change so our homes and workplaces are energy efficient and environmentally sustainable.
And cities will need to prepare for the impacts of climate change - including the risk of coastal inundation, highlighted by a report of a House of Representatives Inquiry released last night.
Our nation has 80 per cent of the population on the coast.
We have to manage the impact of rising sea levels and increased risk of flooding on our cities and coastal areas.
A national approach is needed - that is why we will work closely on the problem with State and Territory governments, coastal councils, natural resource management bodies and experts in developing a response to the Inquiry.
To address this complex, connected set of challenges, and to lift our urban productivity, we must establish new frameworks for how the different levels of government, along with businesses and the community, work together to build better cities and suburbs.
Governments across the nation are now working to integrate long term urban planning and infrastructure investment.
Most have in place or are preparing metropolitan plans to address the challenges of growing populations, land supply, infrastructure rollout, housing and the management of growth corridors.
However, while some capital city planning frameworks are good, implementing them has proved far more difficult.
As President Eisenhower said, the plan is nothing, the planning is everything.
With Australia facing rapid growth in the decades ahead, the time has now come for the Australian Government to take a much greater national responsibility for improving the long-term planning of our major cities.
History shows that when the Commonwealth steps into the urban arena, working in partnership with the states and territories, it has played a strong and positive role.
From the Chifley Government's great post-war urban plan through the first Commonwealth-State Housing Agreement.
To the Whitlam Government's huge investments in sewerage and community infrastructure for our outer suburbs.
To the Hawke-Keating Government's Building Better Cities program that built new infrastructure and affordable housing, sparking renewal in our major cities.
Once again, as we enter the second decade of the 21st century, the time has come for national leadership in our long-term city planning.
Clearly, the Commonwealth should not take over state responsibilities for land planning or have a direct role in the day-to-day decisions of state and local governments.
As Minister Albanese has said, no Commonwealth Minister wants to decide development applications or where to lay sewerage pipes.
But we must recognise the economic reality of the 21st century.
The national government has a clear responsibility to provide national leadership in the development of strategic planning frameworks for our largest cities.
That is why, working with State and Territory governments, we established the Council of Australian Governments Cities Taskforce.
We created the Major Cities Unit within Infrastructure Australia to identify opportunities where national leadership can enhance the prosperity of our cities and the well-being of their citizens.
We have also created the Australian Council of Local Government so that we can hear from, and talk to, all levels of government involved in economic development.
And in August I met for the second time with the Council of Capital City Lord Mayors and we agreed to work in partnership to address climate change in capital cities.
Tonight I announce the next step to integrate these initiatives into a new, national strategy.
In partnership with the States and Territories we will now propose the development of national criteria for the future strategic planning of our major cities.
The first in our country's history.
And, the Commonwealth will now consider linking all future infrastructure funding to compliance with these criteria.
If the Commonwealth is to foot any significant part of the urban infrastructure bill - the Commonwealth will legitimately expect to have confidence in the integrity of the strategic planning system in our major cities.
The goal is that our cities have strong, transparent and long-term plans for growth and high-quality urban development.
That our cities are productive, liveable and sustainable.
Specifically, the new criteria for the strategic planning systems in our major cities should focus on:
- Providing for planned, sequenced and evidence-based land release that meets the housing needs of a growing population and keeps homes affordable.
- Balancing in-fill and greenfield development.
- Implementing credible plans to reduce greenhouse gas emissions - through initiatives such as energy efficiency measures, changes to town planning, practical improvements in public transport infrastructure and reform of building codes and regulations.
- Adapting to the risks of climate change such as coastal inundation and more extreme weather events.
- Emphasising world-class design and associated architectural integrity.
- Providing for building and upgrading nationally significant infrastructure, such as transport corridors, intermodal connections and communications and utilities networks.
- Providing for governments to take into account independent, expert advice on the objectives and implementation of their planning system.
- Providing an effective framework for private sector investment and innovation in the urban infrastructure given that with the fiscal constraints on governments, the nation will need to harness private capital.
We will also need new Commonwealth-State arrangements to jointly assess performance against these criteria and to advise on how performance can be improved.
These arrangements will build the spirit of mutual co-operation, determination and goodwill that characterises the attitude of all Australian governments towards this challenging agenda.
Therefore in 2010 through COAG we propose to develop - in consultation with the states and territories and the Australian Local Government Association - the first ever national criteria for the future strategic planning of our major cities.
Since coming to office, the Australian Government has forged a new constructive working relationship with the States and Territories.
Tackling key challenges in health, education and water reform.
Helping create a seamless national economy.
Helping deliver a National Broadband Network.
Helping close the gap with Indigenous Australians.
Today the Australian Government proposes we begin building a new partnership.
A new commitment to long-term reform of city planning in the interests of national productivity and sustainability.
The new national engagement in our cities that I have signalled tonight is designed to survive the test of future years.
I know the BCA will provide important input to this agenda and I look forward to working with you.
I urge all Australian governments, companies, community organisations and citizens to work with us to build the productive, liveable and sustainable Australian cities of the future.
________________________________________



CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY 
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
I congratulate all of the nominees for this year's awards for your endeavours, your imagination and the leadership that you are showing to a new generation of budding young scientists in our schools and universities.
The Australian Government values your work as scientists and your contribution to the nation - to our economy and prosperity; to our health; to our environment, and to our quality of life.
For those of us who are a little more ignorant than most in this room, we can learn a great deal from our scientists.
Earlier this year I had the privilege of hosting the 20th anniversary meeting of the Prime Minister's Science, Engineering and Innovation Council (PMSEIC).
At that meeting, I learnt from the Chief Scientist Penny Sackett a technical expression used by scientists that I had never heard before - what they called "wicked problems".
I have of course heard men and women of the cloth talking about wickedness.
But I was less used to hearing about wickedness from those in white lab coats.
Penny explained that "wicked problems" - a scientific term, as she advises me - are distinct from the other category of problems, "tame problems".
- Tame problems are those where a problem can be objectively defined and solved through trial-and-error.
- Wicked problems are those problems which cannot be objectively defined and cannot be solved by trial-and-error, because attempting any solution can cause irreversible impacts on that system.
As I reflected on that discussion at PMSEIC, I realised that most of the serious problems facing government are wicked problems.
In other words, in my job, I deal with a lot of wickedness.
Water shortages in communities around Australia.
The reform of the health and hospitals system.
National security and the threat of terrorism.
These are complicated problems.
It can often be unclear exactly what the cause of the problem is; even less clear what the solution is.
But science plays a critical role in overcoming these challenges.
Perhaps the most "wicked" problem facing us as a nation and a world at the moment is climate change.
It is the one of the greatest scientific, economic, and moral challenges of our time.
And it is scientists who have been the town criers of the modern age - warning us, for decades, of the impending danger of global warming.
We cannot afford to wait and see how badly climate change might disrupt normal life on earth.
We cannot afford to get it wrong.
If we get our response to climate change wrong, we can't just try something else - future generations must live with the consequences of our decisions.
For climate change, there is no experiment, no controlled trial-and-error - our generation in history has got one shot to get it right.
That is why our response to climate change is so important to Australia's future.
Another wicked problem that has preoccupied the Government during the past 12 months is the global economic downturn.
It has been an enormously complex challenge.
In its speed and severity, the impact of the global financial crisis during the past year is comparable to the first twelve months of the Great Depression of the 1930s.
It has required extraordinarily complex interventions in financial markets and financial institutions by governments all around the world.
It has also required major coordinated fiscal stimulus.
In the context of the enormous challenges of the past 12 months, Australia has shown remarkable strength and resilience compared to the Major Advanced Economies.
This is a tribute to the hard work of Australian businesses, Australian workers and Australian policy makers.
- We are the only advanced economy to have registered positive economic growth in the past year.
- Second, we have the second lowest unemployment rate of the Major Advanced Economies.
- Third, we have the lowest budget deficit of all the Major Advanced Economies.
- Fourth, we have the lowest debt of all the Major Advanced Economies.
- Fifth, we are the only advanced economy not to go into recession.
The stimulus strategy that the Government began to implement 12 months ago has been timely, targeted and temporary.
It involved immediate support for the economy, and in particular for the retail sector that employs more than one and a half million Australians.
And it involved substantial medium-term and long-term investment in nation-building infrastructure.
There are some people who have criticised the Government's stimulus strategy.
But the alternative to the Government's stimulus strategy would have been to allow the economy to plunge into recession - with more than one million unemployed and with crippling consequences for business and consumer confidence.
By acting decisively, we have so far avoided a technical recession in Australia.
We have so far managed the global recession well.
Now, we need to manage the economic recovery.
A key element of managing economic recovery is to build the foundations for long-term growth and prosperity, by lifting productivity growth.
In the long run it is productivity growth that improves living standards and that supports higher levels of growth.
Australia has experienced declining productivity growth since the 1990s, falling from 3.3 per cent during the 1990s to just 1.1 per cent in the current decade.
The Government's long-term challenge is to turbo-charge our productivity growth rate.
Since coming to government almost two years ago, we have been advancing an agenda for long-term productivity growth:
- The creation of a seamless national economy, collapsing 27 sets of conflicting regulations into a streamlined set of uniform rules.
- A quality and quantity education revolution. 
- Productivity-enhancing infrastructure investment by both the public and private sectors. 
- A communications revolution through a National Broadband Network. 
- Maximising our global competitiveness through targeted tax reform.
I have always said that we cannot rely on strong terms of trade and our resources sector alone to guarantee sustainable economic growth.
We must build the foundations of sustainable growth for the future through policy settings that support education and innovation, that encourage research and development, and foster investment in the commercialisation of new ideas.
Total Commonwealth support for research and innovation is expected to be around $8.6 billion this financial year - 25 per cent more than in 2008-09.
The Australian Government's productivity agenda aims to create a culture of innovation, increase innovative capabilities and raise our long term productivity growth.
As a blueprint for our nation's productivity future, the Government developed Powering Ideas: An Innovation Agenda for the 21st Century.
This is a long-term, 10 year agenda to support productivity growth through innovation.
And it provides new incentives to undertake more Research and Development in both the public and private sectors.
It supports our research capability, both in skills and infrastructure, through the $1.1 billion Super Science Initiative.
This initiative is designed to keep our best emerging scientists in Australia and nurture greater collaboration between our universities and public research agencies.
The initiative will further strengthen our space and astronomy sectors with a $160 million funding injection.
Projects include a new Australian National Centre of Square Kilometre Array Science in Perth and a Space Policy Unit to provide advice to the Government.
$504 million has been allocated for Future Industries - new facilities for cutting-edge biological discovery and biotechnology development.
And two other areas of strength - Marine and Climate - receive more than $387 million in the Super Science Initiative.
The initiative also provides for 100 Super Science Fellowships, and the Australian Postgraduate Awards to encourage further study in the field of science.
We also recognise the importance of universities as the backbone of our research effort.
That is why this year's budget commits an extra half a billion over four years to address the gap in funding for the indirect cost of research - the equipment and materials that are needed for world-class research.
The education system is fundamental to harnessing innovation and boosting productivity.
Because an innovation culture relies on a highly qualified and flexible labour force in all sectors of the economy and society.
And that is why lifting teacher quality is a priority for the Australian Government.
A good teacher can leave a positive impact on a student.
But a great teacher can leave a positive impact on the world.
As you all know a few weeks ago there was a major event in Australian scientific history.
Australian-born and educated biologist Professor Elizabeth Blackburn was awarded the Nobel Prize for medicine.
She is Australia's first female Nobel Laureate.
Professor Blackburn stands in great Australian company alongside the likes of Sir Howard Florey and Professor Peter Doherty.
The prize was awarded for "for the discovery of how chromosomes are protected by telomeres and the enzyme telomerase".
Winning a Nobel Prize in Medicine is an extraordinary achievement and one of which all Australians can be proud.
And Professor Blackburn credits a favourite teacher from the Broadland House Church of England Grammar School in Launceston in the early 1960s, Nancy Hughes, with igniting her passion for science.
And Professor Blackburn's achievement has inspired science students around Australia in recent months.
I note one comment from Jess Cox, a 12 year old student in Year 7 at University High in Melbourne, where Professor Blackburn finished her school studies.
Jess was reported earlier this month remarking:
"I like chemistry and science -- we all think it's cool -- but it (the Nobel prize) is really inspirational."
So just as Professor Blackburn was inspired by her teachers at school, she has now become an inspiration to another generation - and in particular, to girls studying science.
Quality teaching is the single greatest influence on student engagement and achievement.
The Australian Government wants to attract, retain and continue to develop quality teachers and leaders in schools.
Through the 'Smarter Schools - Improving Teacher Quality National Partnership Agreement', the Government has committed $550 million over five years to improving teacher quality.
And the Government is investing in a range of initiatives specifically targeted at invigorating science and maths education in schools and recruiting the best graduates into teaching.
We've reduced HECS contributions for new students in maths and science.
And maths and science graduates who go on to work in related occupations, including teaching, will also be eligible for a refund of about half of their HECS-HELP repayments for up to five years.
The Australian Government is also supporting science teachers though our Building the Education Revolution reforms.
We've allocated $1 billion for the Science and Language Centres for the 21st Century, to build or refurbish some 537 facilities in secondary schools across Australia.
The Government has also committed $2 million to an initiative to encourage students in years 9 and 10 to engage in science.
And Questacon will continue its work in bringing science to Australia with an $11.3m funding investment.
This landmark institution will continue its mission to share the wonder of science with Australian children and adults in remote and regional areas.
Elizabeth Blackburn is a powerful inspiration for a new generation of young scientists.
But we can draw inspiration from men and women of the past as well.
Consider Charles Babbage, the man often described as the father of computing.
It is almost two hundred years since Babbage was experimenting with building his 'Difference Engine No.1' and his 'Analytical Engine'.
When he began building the Difference Engine in 1822, it required some 25,000 separate brass components.
One self-contained part of the Engine, essentially a calculator, took 2,000 brass parts to build but worked perfectly - and extraordinarily, still works today.
Babbage's work was breathtaking in its scope and its ultimate impact, but at the time it was a hard slog.
He struggled to obtain government funding for his research, and a shortage of funds ultimately constrained him from achieving his ambitions.
Indeed it was not until 1991 that the Difference Machine No.2, which he designed in the 1840s, was built by the British Science Museum.
It took 4,000 brass cogs and weighed three tons - and it worked superbly, calculating to 31 decimal places.
An interesting footnote to Babbage's career is that he was deeply critical of the inadequacy of government funding for science and of the quality of science teaching in Britain.
Indeed in 1830 he wrote a treatise called 'Reflections on the Decline of Science in England' - a publication which, with the wisdom of hindsight 180 years later, now seems a little premature.
But Babbage's ultimate contribution to science and to human endeavour is the stuff of legend.
It is embodied in every computer, every mobile phone, indeed most of the gadgets that we each use every day of our lives.
It is a reminder to all those engaged in scientific research that you never know how your work might change the course of history and the lives of generations of people to come.
Indeed the scientists of today - including in this room - continue to build on the early foundations of Charles Babbage.
Science is vital to every community, every nation.
And it is especially important to our nation as we confront the complex challenges of the future - climate change, water shortages, an ageing population, and the broader challenge of competing in a ruthlessly competitive global economy.
Australia is in the very fortunate position of laying claim to some of the finest scientific minds in the world.
The Prime Minister's Prizes for Science go some way to recognising our best and raising the profile of science and science teaching in Australia.
They highlight just how much we have to be proud of and how much potential is yet to be fulfilled.
Over the past 10 years, these Awards have honoured scientists who have unlocked some of the mysteries of biology, medicine, robotics and genetics.
We have paid tribute to scientists such as Frank Fenner for his work in eradicating smallpox.
Graeme Clark, for his multi-channel cochlear ear implant.
And last year, Ian Frazer for his cervical cancer vaccines.
The fruits of their labours are gifts - not just to Australia, but to the world.
The depth and breadth of Australia's scientific firepower is to be marvelled at.
In recognising the important role of scientists I would also like to recognise the Minister for Innovation, Industry, Science and Research, Kim Carr.
Kim has always been a passionate advocate for science and argued strongly for increased levels of support for the sector.
Australian industry and in particular the scientific community have had their interests well represented by the Minister during the global economic crisis.
He has been consistently ahead of the curve on key industry challenges.
Kim also believes - and I agree - that becoming a science teacher is a great career opportunity and wonderful life vocation.
Yet few people know Kim's passion for science teaching extends to his own offspring.
In fact, Kim's daughter has completed a science degree and master of education.
Just this year she started work as a high school science teacher in the western suburbs of Melbourne - Kim, we wish her the best.
Tonight, we celebrate science and science teaching.
If I had one message on the role of science to the nation, it is this.
Science is not about abstract work done in a lab and distant from the real world.
It is about solving real problems for real people in the real world.
It is about dealing with the challenges of the modern world, the global economy, the changing climate and the health and happiness of people all around the world.
And it is about making a difference.
Every individual and organisation represented in this room tonight has a shared responsibility to communicate a passion for scientific endeavour, and inspire a new generation of scientists.
Australia has an outstanding record of scientific achievement in our past.
We have great scientists doing excellent work today.
Our challenge now is to foster a new generation of scientists to confront the challenges of our future.
That is the purpose of the Prime Minister's Prizes for Science.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
Welcome to The Lodge - Therese and I are delighted to see you here this afternoon in support of such a good cause.
And one that's very close to my heart - literally.
DonateLife is about exactly that - donating life.
It's about promoting the cause of organ donation.
About getting people to talk about organ donation.
About getting families to talk about organ donation.
About getting as many people as possible to talk openly about their views, and their wishes.
That's what DonateLife Family and the DonateLife Network are all about.
Last week in Sydney, we saw the tragic death of a young Irish tourist after a street scuffle in Coogee.
Gearoid Walsh was just 23 years old.
He'd been in Australia for only five weeks when this senseless tragedy happened.
His mother flew from Ireland to be by her son's side last Wednesday.
On Thursday, his family made the terrible decision to switch off his life support.
And they also made the brave, generous, compassionate decision - to donate his organs so that others might live.
As Mrs Walsh said on Friday:
"In his death, Gearoid has helped six other Australians by being an organ donor."
My heart, and the heart of all Australians, goes out to the Walsh family at this difficult time.
And I thank them for their great grace and dignity, in acting in such a generous and forgiving spirit, to donate Gearoid's organs.
It's all too easy to take life for granted.
Too easy to take our health for granted, if we are fortunate to live without chronic disease.
We don't know what it is like to be hooked up to a machine that keeps you alive.
We don't realise how the simple things - kicking the footy around, going to school or even a short walk to the shops - can be an Everest to those whose bodies are failing them.
Or the constant fear, sadness and pain of watching your child's health deteriorate.
We don't know what it is like to hope that every time the phone rings, it is the call that could save your life.
Today, there are 1,700 Australians on our transplant waiting list today, waiting for that phone call.
The phone call that tells them that their chance for a life-saving transplant has arrived.
Some of you here today know that feeling all too well.
People like Liz Fowler.
Liz Fowler is a mother of two.
And she has lived with kidney disease for 20 years.
Liz is waiting for the call.
And has been for more than six years.
And she has two absolutely essential reasons for needing that call:
Her son, who is severely autistic and has been diagnosed with cancer;
Her daughter has won a scholarship to the Australian Institute of Sport. Liz wants to see her row in London at the Olympics.
Liz is one of 1,700 Australians waiting for a call.
Then there is Lachy Wallis, from my home town of Brisbane.
Lachy and his dad David, mum Lisa and little brother Mitchell, are here with us this afternoon.
Looking at Lachy today it is hard to believe that this young bloke was so sick at the beginning of the year.
When he was put on the transplant waiting list, his health was deteriorating so rapidly that Lisa and David did not know if he would survive until a suitable donor was found.
So dad was tested for his suitability as a living donor.
And a week before David was due to have a third of his liver removed, the call came.
A liver had become available.
Lisa and David went into shock.
It was far from a celebration.
The reality of the situation hit home - that young Lachy, who was very ill at this stage, was about to undergo a very long and very risky operation.
But on top of that, Lisa said, was the knowledge that the liver was available because someone had died.
And a family somewhere was grieving for a lost loved one.
Lachy and his family know the power of a donor's gift.
And once Lachy came out the other side of the operation, the Wallis family silently thanked the donor and allowed themselves to enjoy the pure happiness of that gift.
Now when people ask Lachy how he's feeling he replies "I've never felt better".
And he is having swimming lessons three times a week and he is trying to gain enough strength and weight to get back on the footy field.
We wish you luck mate and hope to see you flying down the wing very soon.
On average, people on the transplant list wait between six months and four years.
Two people die each week waiting for a transplant.
So far this year 189 generous Australians became organ donors, resulting in a new chance at life for 608 Australians.
To those Australian families who said yes to donation, we thank you for making the decision to give others a special and deeply personal gift.
One of those families is with us today - the Kennetts from Adelaide.
Their wife and mother Julie passed away from cancer last year.
Rob, Perri and Jane - we offer our deepest condolences for your loss.
But Julie was very clear about her wish to be an organ donor and had discussed it with her family.
Julie donated both corneas enabling two people to have the gift of sight.
I'm sure, like the Wallis family, that the recipients of Julie's corneas thanked her.
And thank her every day they wake up and open their eyes and see the world around them.
It is people like Liz, Lachy and the Kennetts who have inspired the Government's $151.1 million Organ Donation Reform Package.
This national reform program is spearheaded by the Australian Organ and Tissue Authority and is gaining momentum in communities around the country.
Today, I am pleased to launch the cornerstone of our reform agenda - The DonateLife Network.
This is a newly formed national network of organ and tissue donation agencies and specialist clinical staff.
The 300-strong team behind the DonateLife Network includes 91 new hospital-based medical directors and senior nursing staff in 75 hospitals around Australia.
And DonateLife Agency staff are in every state and territory.
The DonateLife Network is central to our efforts to increase Australia's rate of organ donation for transplantation.
But improving our donation rate doesn't fall on the shoulders of these dedicated medical professionals alone.
We all have to do our part.
Although 90 per cent of Australians support organ donation, the family consent rate is just 56 per cent.
Forty per cent of Australians don't realise that their family makes the final decision regarding organ donation.
We can increase the family consent rates by ensuring that our family knows our wishes and that we know theirs.
Talking is the key.
This is why we are gathered here today.
Because it is in our homes that we can make a difference.
It is in our lounge rooms and at our dinner tables that we can start the conversations that may end in saving a life.
Memorable discussions that will allow us to confidently make the decision - should we ever be asked - to give consent for a loved one's organs and tissue to be donated.
Confidence that comes from knowing the wishes of our loved ones.
And there are three simple words that will help us gain that confidence.
Discover.
Decide.
And discuss.
Discover the facts about organ and tissue donation.
Make an informed choice and decide to become an organ donor.
Discuss with family and friends, so that you know each other's wishes.
Therese and the kids and I have had that chat as a family.
And today I can announce that we have decided to become a DonateLife Family.
As a DonateLife Family, we have committed to discussing and upholding each other's wishes.
And we want to invite every Australian to join us.
Deciding to become an organ donor is not a decision to be taken lightly.
That is why I encourage all Australians to discover the facts on the new DonateLife website.
At donatelife.gov.au, family and friends can find a range of materials, including a DonateLife Family pledge.
A simple tool that you can use to keep a record of each other's wishes.
The website also has Australian donor and recipient family stories, including those of the Kennett and Wallis families.
Their stories will encourage and inspire.
Australia is blessed to have highly skilled medical professionals.
We have a world class reputation for successful transplant outcomes.
Our surgeons know how precious donated organs are.
Anyone who has received a new organ knows how precious they are.
When you become a donor you don't just donate a kidney or a heart or a liver.
You donate a gift.
A second chance.
You donate life.
www.donatelife.gov.au


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
Thank you Michael and thanks to all the supporters of the Lowy Institute for joining us today.
As you know, I attended the Major Economies Forum in L'Aquila in July; I was recently at the G20 Leaders meeting in Pittsburgh; and next week I will travel to the APEC Leaders meeting in Singapore.
At each of these meetings, and in constant bilateral conversations being conducted by national leaders around the world, the common thematic is: What does our nation, what does our region and what does the world do to respond to climate change, the greatest long term threat to us all?
As APEC leaders gather in Singapore next week, this is a critical question.
The Asia Pacific region will play the key role in leading the world into economic recovery. Similarly, our region must play a central role if we are to forge a global consensus on tackling climate change.
This afternoon I want to set out the views that I will be reflecting to other world leaders in the days and weeks ahead, in bilateral conversations and in forums such as APEC, leading up to the Copenhagen summit.
Australia and the world today stand at critical junctures in our national and global strategies to tackle climate change.
It is around 20 days until the Senate votes on the Australian Government's Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme.
20 days until the most important vote on our national strategy to tackle climate change.
20 days away from the vote on the Government's cap and trade emissions trading system which both sides of politics have recognised as the lowest cost way to tackle climate change.
And we are just 31 days away from the Copenhagen Conference of Parties - an historic moment to forge a global deal to put a global price on carbon.
Today we are approaching the crossroads. Both these policies are reaching crunch time.
When you strip away all the political rhetoric, all the political excuses, there are two stark choices - action or inaction. The resolve of the Australian Government is clear - we choose action, and we do so because Australia's fundamental economic and environmental interests lie in action.
Action now. Not action delayed.
As one of the hottest and driest continents on earth, Australia's environment and economy will be among the hardest and fastest hit by climate change if we do not act now. The scientific evidence from the CSIRO and other expert bodies have outlined the implications for Australia, in the absence of national and global action on climate change:
     * Temperatures in Australia rising by around five degrees by the end of the century.
     * By 2070, up to 40 per cent more drought months are projected in eastern Australia and up to 80 per cent more in south-western Australia.
     * A fall in irrigated agricultural production in the Murray Darling Basin of over 90 per cent by 2100.
     * Storm surges and rising sea levels - putting at risk over 700,000 homes and businesses around our coastlines, with insurance companies warning that preliminary estimates of the value of property in Australia exposed to the risk of land being inundated or eroded by rising sea levels range from $50 billion to $150 billion.
     * Our Gross National Product dropping by nearly two and a half per cent through the course of this century from the devastation climate change would wreak on our infrastructure alone.
The Government took a plan to tackle climate change to the last election, to tackle the risks climate change poses to our planet, and especially to the health, lifestyle and livelihoods of our children.
That plan included two fundamental parts:
     * First, a domestic plan of action to reduce Australia's carbon pollution, including:
         * Expanding the Renewable Energy Target to 20 per cent by 2020 (and subsequently directly investing over $2 billion in renewable energy, including investment in large scale solar generating capacity that will be three times larger than the world's current largest project).
         * A national energy efficiency strategy to reduce the energy that we can consume, and undertaking the largest investment in energy efficiency ever seen in this country.
         * A Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme that will increase the cost of carbon over time and facilitate a transition to a low carbon pollution economy.
     * The second part of our strategy is participation in global action to tackle climate change, including:
         * ratifying the Kyoto Protocol;
         * participating in global technology transfers - including Australian leadership in a global coalition to develop carbon capture and storage through the Australia-initiated Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute; and
         * strong engagement towards a new post-Kyoto global agreement .
This was the platform we took to the Australian people at the election. This is the program of action we have been prosecuting over the past two years. Yet the cornerstone of this program of action, the CPRS, still lies stymied in the Senate.
Australia has certainly not been alone in our endeavours to tackle global climate change. At the same time, around the world we have seen nations of every political stripe take concrete action to work towards legislation in this critical area - actions which have been slowly building towards coordinated international action to tackle climate change. And most nations have been engaged in the multilateral process - through the Bali Roadmap two years ago, through the 14th Conference of the Parties in Poznan, Poland last year, and the intensifying global negotiations leading up to the 15th Conference of Parties in Copenhagen this year.
Today, the culmination of this domestic and global action is in sight. Much progress has been made, but, the truth is that there is still a long way to go. In fact, the hardest part of our journey is ahead of us over the next 31 days.
This is a profoundly important time for our nation, for our world and for our planet.
In Australia, we must pass our Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme - to deliver certainty for business at home and to play our part abroad in any global agreement to bring greenhouse gases down.
President Obama in the United States is also working hard so that he can take strong commitments to Copenhagen. And let us never forget that in the US, as in Australia, under both our respective previous governments, zero action was taken on bringing in cap and trade schemes meaning that the governments that replaced them began with a zero start.
Other countries are striving to build domestic political momentum in their own countries to take strong commitments into the global deal.
The challenge we face, and others around the world face, is to build momentum and overcome domestic political constraints.
The truth is this is hard, because the climate change skeptics, the climate change deniers, the opponents of climate change action are active in every country.
They are a minority. They are powerful. And invariably they are driven by vested interests.
Powerful enough to so far block domestic legislation in Australia, powerful enough to so far slow down the passage of legislation through the US Congress. And ultimately - by limiting the ambition of national climate change commitments - they are powerful enough to threaten a deal on global climate change both in Copenhagen and beyond.
The opponents of action on climate change fall into one of three categories.
     * First, the climate science deniers.
     * Second, those that pay lip service to the science and the need to act on climate change but oppose every practicable mechanism being proposed to bring about that action.
     * Third, those in each country that believe their country should wait for others to act first.
Together, these groups, alive in every major country including Australia, constitute a powerful global force for inaction, and they are particularly entrenched in a range of conservative parties around the world.
As we approach Copenhagen, these three groups of climate skeptics are quite literally holding the world to ransom, provoking fear campaigns in every country they can, blocking or delaying domestic legislation in every country they can, with the objective of slowing and if possible destroying the momentum towards a global deal on climate change.
As we approach the Copenhagen conference these groups of climate change deniers face a moment of truth, and the truth is this: we will need to work much harder to reach an agreement in Copenhagen because these advocates of inaction are holding back domestic commitments, and are in turn holding back global commitments on climate change.
It is time to be totally blunt about the agenda of the climate change skeptics in all their colours - some more sophisticated than others.
It is to destroy the CPRS at home, and it is to destroy agreed global action on climate change abroad, and our children's fate - and our grandchildren's fate - will lie entirely with them.
It's time to remove any polite veneer from this debate. The stakes are that high. 
The first category of those opposed to action is the vocal group of conservatives who do not accept the scientific consensus. This group believes the science is inconclusive and does not provide an evidentiary basis for anthropogenic climate change.
In Australia, before the 2007 election, this group was thought to be relatively small. There appeared - for a time - to be bipartisan consensus on the need for action on climate change. In recent times, this bipartisan support has frayed.
As one Liberal Member of Parliament said to Phil Coorey of the Sydney Morning Herald last year:
"[at the last election we supported an ETS because] we were staring at an electoral abyss. We had to pretend we cared."
(SMH, 28 JULY 2008)
More recently that pretence has been increasingly cast aside. Would-be Liberal leader Tony Abbott said in July this year that "the science ... is contentious to say the least". (27 July 2009)
Liberal Senator Cory Bernardi said:
"I remain unconvinced about the need for an ETS given that carbon dioxide is vital for life on earth".
Liberal Senator Alan Eggleston said: 
"Levels of carbon dioxide have risen in the world, but whether or not this is the sole cause or just a contributor to climate change is, I think, unanswered." 
(11 AUGUST 2009)
Liberal Senate leader Nick Minchin said this year: 
"CO2 is not by any stretch of the imagination a pollutant... This whole extraordinary scheme is based on the as yet unproven assertion that anthropogenic emissions of CO2 are the main driver of global warming." 
(11 AUGUST 2009)
Alternative Liberal leader Joe Hockey - who knows better - has been drawn into the same sort of doublespeak, remarking on the Today Show in August:
"Look, climate change is real Karl, you know whether it is made by human beings or not that is open to dispute." 
(12 AUGUST 2009)
Even the leader of the Opposition, once Minister for the Environment, Malcolm Turnbull, has flirted with this doublespeak, telling Alan Jones on 2GB:
"I think most people have at least some doubts about the science." 
(19 JUNE 2009)
The tentacles of the climate change skeptics reach deep into the ranks of the Liberal Party, and once you add the National Party it's plan the skeptics and the deniers are a major force.
Climate sceptics are also a powerful political lobby in the United States.
Republican National Committee Chairman Michael Steel said on 6 March 2009:
"We are cooling. We are not warming. The warming you see out there, the supposed warming, and I am using my finger quotation marks here, is part of the cooling process."
House Minority Leader John Boehner said on April 19 2009:
"The idea that carbon dioxide is a carcinogen that is harmful to our environment is almost comical. Every time we exhale, we exhale carbon dioxide."
Republican Congressman John Shimkus said on 25 March 2009:
"If we decrease the use of carbon dioxide, are we not taking away plant food from the atmosphere?"
The legion of climate change skeptics are active across the world, and they happily play with our children's future.
The clock is ticking for the planet, but the climate change skeptics simply do not care. The vested interests at work are simply too great.
It's been more than 30 years since the first World Climate Conference called on governments to guard against potential climate hazards.
It's been 20 years since the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change was formed and produced its first report.
17 years ago, in 1992, the international community acknowledged the importance of tackling climate change at the Rio Earth Summit and created the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
And the most recent IPCC scientific conclusion in 2007 was that "warming of the climate system is unequivocal" and the "increase in global average temperatures since the mid 20th century is very likely due to the observed increase in anthropogenic greenhouse gas concentrations."
This is the conclusion of 4,000 scientists appointed by governments from virtually every country in the world, and the term "very likely" is defined in the scientific conclusion of this report as being 90 per cent probable.
Attempts by politicians in this country and others to present what is an overwhelming global scientific consensus as little more than an unfolding debate, with two sides evenly represented in a legitimate scientific argument, are nothing short of intellectually dishonest. They are a political attempt to subvert what is now a longstanding scientific consensus, an attempt to twist the agreed science in the direction of a predetermined political agenda to kill climate change action.
It reminds me of the efforts of the smoking lobby decades ago as they tried for years to politically subvert by so-called scientific means that there was any link between smoking and lung cancer.
Put more simply: these climate change sceptics around the world would be laughable if they were not so politically powerful - particularly in the ranks of conservative parties.
The second group of do-nothing climate change skeptics are those who purport to accept the scientific consensus, but in the next breath are unwilling to support any of the practicable plans of action that would actually do something about climate change. This group plays lip service to the climate change science but when push comes to shove refuse to support climate change action. In Australia, these naysayers have successfully blocked the development of an emissions trading scheme for more than a decade.
After 12 years of inaction under the previous government, this government has worked to build a national consensus around our Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme. We took the concept to the people at the 2007 election, and since then we have methodically, clearly and comprehensively worked towards passage of our scheme.
The Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme Green Paper was released on 16 June 2008.
The Garnaut Climate Change Review was released on 30 September 2008.
The Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme White Paper was released on 15 December 2008.
The Draft Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme legislation was released in March.
There have been numerous Senate Inquiries.
There have also been numerous industry consultations.
As of May 2009, the Government had built wide support for action on climate through a carbon pollution reduction scheme.
There was broad business, environmental and community support from:
     * The Business Council of Australia
     * The Australian Industry group
     * The Climate Institute
     * The Australian Conservation Foundation
     * The World Wildlife Fund
     * The Australian Council of Social Services representing lower income Australians.
Today, after so many reports, reviews, consultations, not to mention the small matter of an election - the overwhelming need for Australia to tackle the great challenge of our generation is being frustrated by the do-nothing climate change skeptics.
As recently as last year, the Leader of the Opposition was emphatic in his support for an emissions trading scheme. He said it was the "central mechanism" in the fight against climate change.
Speaking at the National Press Club in May last year, he stated:
"The Emissions Trading Scheme is the central mechanism to decarbonise our economy." 
(21 May 2008)
A few days later, he said: 
"The biggest element in the fight against climate change has to be the emissions-trading scheme." 
(HANSARD - 26 MAY 2008)
But still today, after so many reports and consultations, the Liberal Party, the National Party and other opponents of action raise objections to the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme.
Their objections fall into three categories:
     * Some argue that the cost is too high in terms of its impact on our economy.
     * Others argue that the cost is too high in terms of its impact on households.
     * And others object to the system of global emissions trading because they believe it will unjustifiably transfer money and power from rich countries to poor countries.
Let us take each of these in turn.
First is the cost to our economy and jobs.
This has been a constant theme of the Liberal and National Parties' attacks on the CPRS. Mr Turnbull said the CPRS "is guaranteed to slow our economic recovery, cost us jobs."
And the de facto leader of the National Party, Barnaby Joyce, refers to the emissions trading scheme as the "employment termination scheme" - whereas I thought any self-respecting National Party leader would be out there standing up for farmers facing 40 to 80 per cent more drought in the future, rather than betraying them.
The facts about the impact of unmitigated climate change on the one hand and the CPRS on the other tell a very different story, but that eternal motto of the Liberal and National Parties is never let the facts stand in the road of a good fear campaign - whether it's debt, border security or climate change.
Here are the facts.
Treasury modelling done in 2008 demonstrates Australia can continue to achieve strong trend economic growth while making significant cuts in emissions through the CPRS. Treasury modelling also demonstrates that all major employment sectors grow over the years to 2020 - substantially increasing employment from today's levels. Treasury modelling also projects that clean industries will create sustainable jobs of the future - in fact by 2050 the renewable electricity sector will be 30 times larger than it is today.
Another element of the Liberal and National fear campaign about the design of the CPRS is that it will impose unmanageable cost on households.
Again, Senator Joyce - fearmonger in chief on climate change, he who therefore betrays the real interests of Australian farmers - puts the position of the Liberal and National parties as follows:
"If you live in a cave with a candle you would probably be OK, but if your house is wired up for power then every electrical appliance will be attached to a power generator which in all likelihood will pay a tax and that tax will be passed on to you, the consumer." 
(Joyce - 27 JULY 2009)
Again, the facts on the true household costs and impacts of the CPRS tell a different story. Treasury modelling again demonstrates that the price impact of the CPRS is modest. The CPRS is expected to raise household prices by 0.4 per cent in 2011-12 and 0.8 per cent in 2012-13, and the government has provided household compensation to help assist with these modest cost rises.
Pensioners, seniors, carers and people with disability and low-income households will receive additional support to fully meet the expected overall increase in the cost of living flowing from the scheme. Middle-income households will also receive additional support to help meet the expected overall increase in the cost of living flowing from the scheme.
A third argument from those who quibble with the design of the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme is that the international design aspects of the scheme are flawed.
Lord Christopher Monckton - a former adviser to Margaret Thatcher - was quoted this week in the Australian press by Janet Albrechtsen. Lord Monckton describes the potential Copenhagen agreement as a plan to set up a transnational "government" on a scale the world has never before seen. Enter the "world government" conspiracy theorists.
Lord Monckton also publicly warned Americans that "in the next few weeks, unless you stop it, your president will sign your freedom, your democracy and your prosperity away forever."
Janet Albrechtsen, in her understated neo-conservative way, refers to the potential Copenhagen agreement as a UN "power grab". This gaggle of world government conspiracy theorists are so far out there on the far right, that they rub up next to the global anarchists of the far left.
Those who argue that any multilateral action is by definition evil.
Those who argue that climate change does not represent a global market failure.
Those who argue that somehow the market will magically solve the problem.
And that uncoordinated national actions will fix the problem.
Without answering the basic logical question of how can we deal with an existential challenge for the whole planet which lies beyond the capacity of any individual national action to address.
The climate change deniers now form the comfortable bedfellows of the global conspiracy theorists - in total bald-faced denial of global scientific, economic and environmental reality. These arguments - thinly veiled attempts to create a new climate change global conspiracy theory - are now being used in Australia.
Like the arguments from climate change deniers, these arguments have zero basis in evidence.
Where is their equivalent evidence basis to Treasury modelling published by the Government of the industry and employment impacts of climate change?
Where is their equivalent evidence basis to Treasury modelling published by the Government on the cost impacts for households from the CPRS - and on the adequacy of the compensation arrangements put in place by the Government in our White Paper?
The answer once again is there is none.
Where is the evidence basis offered by the new league of world government conspiracy theorists that climate change can be effectively dealt with by market means or by uncoordinated national means?
Answer - there is none.
The truth is that the do-nothing climate change skeptics offer no alternative official body of evidence from any credible government in the world.
Absolutely none. The truth is they offer zero evidence.
Instead they offer maximum fear, the universal conservative stock in trade.
And by doing so, these do-nothing climate change skeptics are prepared to destroy our children's future.
The third group of climate deniers are those who pretend to accept the science but then urge delay because they don't want their country to be the first to act.
In Australia there was once a political consensus resisting this parochial view.
The Shergold Report commissioned by John Howard and written by the head of the Prime Minister's department recommended that Australia should not wait for the rest of the world to act:
"... waiting until a truly global response emerges before imposing an emissions cap will place costs on Australia by increasing business uncertainty and delaying or losing investment."
(Report of the Prime Ministerial Task Group on Emissions Trading, June 2007, p.6)
The current Leader of the Opposition also stated that a domestic ETS would help in international negotiations too: 
"... our first hand experience in implementing ... an emissions trading system would be of considerable assistance in our international discussions and negotiation aimed at achieving an effective global agreement."
(Turnbull - SMH Opinion Piece - 9 July 2008)
Then the Leader of the Opposition stated he no longer supported domestic action before Copenhagen:
"I would not find, I would not support finalising the design this year. Even the best designed scheme in theory needs to have the input of the knowledge of what happens at Copenhagen and what the Americans will do." 
(AM - 16 MARCH 2009)
Seven times the Liberals and Nationals have promised to make a decision on their policy on climate change - and seven times they have delayed.
     * In December 2007 they said wait for Garnaut.
     * In September 2008 they said wait for Treasury modelling.
     * In September 2008 they said wait for the White Paper.
     * In December 2008 they said wait until the Pearce Report.
     * In April 2009 they said wait for the Senate Inquiry.
     * In May 2009 they said wait for the Productivity Commission - forgetting that the Productivity Commission already made a submission on emissions trading to the Howard Government's Shergold Report.
     * Now the Liberals and National have said wait for Copenhagen and for President Obama's scheme.
It is an endless cycle of delay - and I am sure that with December almost upon us, the eighth excuse cannot be far away - which will be to wait until the next year or the year after until all the rest of the world has acted at which time Australia will act.
What absolute political cowardice.
What an absolute failure of leadership.
What an absolute failure of logic.
The inescapable logic of this approach is that if every nation makes the decision not to act until others have done so, then no nation will ever act.
The immediate and inevitable consequence of this logic - if echoed in other countries - is that there will be no global deal as each nation says to its domestic constituencies that they cannot act because others have not acted.
The result is a negotiating stalemate. A permanent standoff.
And this of course is the consistent ambition of all three groups of do-nothing climate change deniers.
As we approach Copenhagen, it becomes clearer that the domestic political pressure produced by the climate change skeptics now has profound global consequences by reducing the momentum towards an ambitious global deal. The argument that we must not act until others do is an argument that has been used by political cowards since time immemorial - both of the left and the right.
To take just one example, it has been used as an argument to retain protectionism, stifling economic growth and global competition, and preventing the spread of global prosperity.
As many have noted, it is the international political version of the prisoner's dilemma. If we allow our actions to be dictated by what we falsely conclude to be in our narrow self-interest, then we harm not just others but ourselves as well because climate change inaction harms us as well.
Climate change deniers are small in number, but they are too dangerous to be ignored. They are well resourced and well represented by political conservatives in many, many countries.
And the danger they pose is this - by collapsing political momentum towards national and global action on climate change, they collapse global political will to act at all. They are the stick that gets stuck in the wheel, that despite its size may yet bring the train to a complete stop.
And that is what they want, because they are driven by a narrowly defined self interest of the present and are utterly contemptuous towards our children's interest in the future.
This brigade of do-nothing climate change skeptics are dangerous because if they succeed, then it is all of us who will suffer.
Our children.
And our grandchildren.
If we fail, then it will be a failure that will echo through future generations.
The consequences for Australia of failing to act domestically and internationally on climate change are severe. We know from formal global and national economic modelling that the costs of inaction are greater than the costs of acting. Treasury modelling from October 2008 shows that economies that defer action on climate change face long-term costs around 15 per cent higher than those that take action now.
The sooner we act, the better placed our companies will be to benefit from new emerging global markets, and to benefit from the economic gains from improved efficiency. Moving to a low pollution economy will require significant investment in renewable energy, carbon capture and storage, energy efficiency and other low emissions technologies.
We need to start giving the signal to investors that they need to factor the price of carbon into their decisions to make the investments we need. Importantly, business needs certainty to make these investments.
As Greig Gailey, former President of the Business Council of Australia said:
"Only business can make the many investments needed to transition Australia to a low carbon economy. To do this business needs certainty."
Without passage of the CPRS there will be no certainty for business. That is why business groups like the Business Council of Australia and the Australian Industry Group want to see the major parties come together and vote on the CPRS this year.
Heather Ridout, Chief Executive of the Australian Industry Group said:
"... many of our members are telling us that they are holding off making investments until there is a greater degree of clarity around domestic climate change legislation."
(ADECCO Group Australia Breakfast - 15 October 2009)
Russell Caplan, Chairman of Shell Australia, said:
"... we believe a far greater risk is that Australia misses the opportunity to put a policy framework in place to deal with this issue. This would create a climate of continuing uncertainty for industry and potentially delay the massive investments required." 
(BRW - 6 August 2009)
These are the implications for Australia. These are the political challenges we now face both at home and abroad.
But my unequivocal message to the nation today is that this nation Australia will not be deterred.
Our course is clear.
That is why this government will press forward with our plan to tackle climate change domestically and globally.
Domestically we will press forward with the passage of the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme.
It will be voted on in the House in the week beginning Monday November 16.
It will be introduced into the Senate immediately after the vote in the House.
It will then be voted on in the Senate in the week beginning 23 November.
We welcome the Opposition's recent cooperation and I'm pleased to hear from Minister Wong that negotiations are proceeding in good faith. I'd like to personally commend the Member for Groome for his genuine efforts to engage with the Government in good faith to reach a reasonable outcome with the Government that will finally deliver action on Climate Change.
We are of course concerned by the comments of the Leader of the Opposition in the Senate that "even if the government accepts all our amendments, we may well still vote against the bill." 
(NICK MINCHIN- 2UE- 30 OCTOBER 2009)
The do-nothing climate change skeptics are still alive and well in the Coalition. After 12 years of inaction, and after two years of preparation, the nation demands a genuine timetable and good faith negotiations to give business the certainty they need with climate change.
The Australian Government is also committed to intensively engaging to support an ambitious agreement in Copenhagen.
At Copenhagen we need an ambitious agreement on mitigation, adaptation, finance and technology.
As UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon said yesterday, the formal UN negotiations are moving slowly.
The UN Secretary-General has said we must maximise the agreement we can reach in Copenhagen. They can resolve some issues, but not others.
Now is time for strenuous efforts by all leaders and ministers.
Denmark's Prime Minister Rasmussen is engaging a growing number of leaders - in the Copenhagen Commitment Circle - to accelerate engagement by leaders.
Australia is committed to playing a leadership role and has joined Mexico and the UN Secretary-General in the initial group of 'friends of the Chair' to help build consensus and draw out concrete commitments from across the world.
In July this year at the G8 meetings in L'Aquila, Australia helped form a 2 degree Celsius 450 ppm ambition for global action on climate change, and it was at this meeting that Australia launched the Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute, a concrete initiative to make CCS technology a reality.
Australia is currently chair of the Pacific Island Forum which this year delivered the Pacific Leaders' Climate Change Call to Action demanding urgent action on a real threat to the viability of some Pacific communities.
In September, Australia at the request of the UN Secretary-General co-chaired a roundtable at the UN Special Session on Climate Change - with a view to driving a sense of political urgency with other leaders, and representing the views of the Pacific.
Australia has launched the Forest Carbon Partnerships with Indonesia and Papua New Guinea - an initiative providing policy and technical support to protect the great forests in our neighbourhood.
And Australia has established a $150 million Climate Change Adaptation Fund - supporting vulnerable nations dealing with the real impact of climate change, with a strong focus on the Pacific.
For years - and then, with increasing intensity, in recent months - do-nothing climate change skeptics have been mounting a systematic campaign against action on climate change.
Their aim is not to convince every person on earth of the follies of acting on climate change. Their aim is to erode just enough of the political will that action becomes impossible.
By slowing the actions of each individual country, they aim to slowly drag global negotiations on climate change to a standstill. By hampering decisive action at a national level, they aim to make it impossible at an international level.
If Copenhagen does not deliver the outcome we so urgently need, no individual climate change skeptic will be responsible, but each of them will have played their part.
The corrosive effect of climate skeptics eroding the political will to act may be the disintegration of any possibility of meaningful action on climate change.
In this debate the climate change skeptics have erected an intellectual house of cards based on one simple premise: that the cost of not acting is nothing.
When you boil down their arguments, their world government conspiracy theories and their back of the envelope calculations - that in its starkest simplicity and entirety is what is left: that the cost of not acting is nothing.
That is the simplest premise upon which the scepticism of Malcolm, Barnaby, Andrew, Alan, Janet and even Lord Monckton is based. They cling to that single premise like a polar bear clings to a melting iceberg.
Without that premise, their scepticism is sunk. Malcolm, Barnaby, Andrew, Janet and the Thatcherite Lord Monckton are betting the house on that simple premise that the cost of not acting is nothing.
For people who claim to hold the conservative torch, their scepticism is in fact radical in its riskiness and recklessness. By deliberately undermining and eroding the capacity to achieve both domestic and international action on climate change the skeptics are attempting to force the world to take the single most reckless bet in our long history.
They are betting our future, the future of our children and our grandchildren, and they are doing so based on their own personal intuitions, their personal prejudices and their deeply ingrained political prejudices.
And they are doing so in the total absence of any genuine body of evidence.
Climate change skeptics in all their guises and disguises are not conservatives. They are radicals.
They are reckless gamblers who are betting all our futures on their arrogant assumption that their intuitions should triumph over the evidence.
The logic of these skeptics belongs in a casino, not a science lab, and not in the ranks of any responsible government.
Malcolm, Barnaby, Andrew, Janet, even Lord Monckton shouldn't even bother with the pretence of science and just admit the currency of their prescription for inaction has all the legitimacy of a roulette wheel.
Basically, let's just sit back, do nothing and see what happens.
The alternative - our alternative - is to base policy on the evidence.
No responsible government confronted with the evidence delivered by the 4,000 scientists associated with the international panel could then in conscience choose not to act. In any public company, it would represent a gross contempt of the most basic fiduciary duty.
Malcolm and Barnaby might like to bet the future of Australia on the off chance of winning an election, but this Government will not.
A fairly well-known bloke once said that when gambling:
You've got to know when to hold 'em, know when to fold 'em.
Know when to walk away, know when to run.
My message to the climate change skeptics, to the big betters and the big risk takers is this:
You are betting our children's future and the future of our grandchildren.
You are betting our jobs, our houses, our farms, our reefs, our economy and our future on an intuition - on a gut feeling; on a political prejudice you have about science.
That is too big a risk, too radical a departure from the basic conservative principles of public policy.
Malcolm, Barnaby, Andrew, Janet - stop gambling with our future.
You've got to know when to fold 'em - and for the skeptics, that time has come.
The Government I lead will act.


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
I am delighted to be here this morning to open the Master Builders Australia National Conference, and to be here on the Gold Coast, a city which celebrated its 50th birthday this year.
On May 15, 1959, the name South Coast was dropped in preference for the Gold Coast. As Mayor Ron Clarke has said, it was a flash of inspiration.
Ron also claims that it's made this region "more famous than Brisbane". That's one I'll leave for others to debate.
For my part, I've known and loved this region since I was a kid. I've seen its extraordinary growth and development.
In our nation, we know a city has really come of age when it can make its way into one of the national footy codes, so the Gold Coast has really made it - with three major codes queuing up to sign up a Gold Coast team in recent years, and after just three years in the NRL competition, the Gold Coast Titans fought their way to third place this year. Gold Coast United joined the A-League football competition this year, and now also sits third on the ladder, and in 2011 the Gold Coast Football Club will join the AFL, and it's significant that Karmichael Hunt could have played any code, in any city, in any country - but he has chosen to be part of the new Gold Coast AFL franchise.
So the Gold Coast is ground zero for the tussle between three of our great football codes, each vying for the loyalty of this important and fast growing region.
In focusing this conference on 'Building A Sustainable Industry', you are tackling some of the most important long-term concerns for our nation's future growth.
Just last week, I announced a new plan for national leadership in the development of strategic planning frameworks for our largest cities. It involves a new commitment to long-term reform of city planning in the interests of national productivity and sustainability. The Australian Government values the role of the building and construction industry in nation building for Australia's future.
We have a vast nation building challenge ahead of us. The Intergenerational Report that will soon be released forecasts that by 2049, Australia's population will rise by 60 per cent to reach a total of 35 million people. Most of these 35 million people will live in our cities. Nearby, Brisbane will more than double in size to reach four million.
Here on the Gold Coast the local population is predicted to double by 2050 to 1.2 million, thanks to natural population increase and what the Gold Coast Bulletin describes as "hordes of interstate migrants".
The century ahead stands to be the greatest century of economic growth and nation building in our nation's history.
As I've said in recent days, I believe in a big Australia, but I recognise that growth will generate its own challenges, including the need for much better planning and delivery of infrastructure. This is a challenge we need to prepare for today.
That's why we need a strong, competitive, high-skilled building and construction industry.
The Australian Government has made an important start through our Nation Building -- Economic Stimulus Plan. Today I want to thank the members of the MBA and the building industry who have worked hard to deliver on projects across Australia.
This morning I can report we have made major progress in the delivery of the Nation Building plan. Almost 50,000 building, construction and renovation plans have now been approved. Over 23,000 have been commenced. This is an extraordinary achievement - the largest Commonwealth infrastructure plan in our nation's history.
It is transforming schools, universities, community facilities and neighbourhoods across the nation and leaving a great legacy for the future.
One year ago, Australia was facing the full impact of the global economic crisis. In the midst of that crisis, we recognised the important role the building and construction industry could play in sustaining economic activity. The sector generates around $80 billion in economic activity each year. It provides jobs for around one million Australians, and it has an important role to play in the economy of every city and every region across the nation.
Last week we have had some promising news from the US -- with its economy posting growth of 0.9 per cent in the third quarter, the best showing in two years.
It has provided the strongest signal yet that the global economy has entered a new - though fragile - phase of recovery after the worst recession since the 1930s. But Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke has warned that the early recovery won't be robust enough to prevent the unemployment rate  -  now at a 26-year high of 9.8 per cent  -  continuing to rise in the months ahead.
Just 12 months ago, economists around the world were wondering if we would even be talking about recovery at all this year.
The early days of the global recession mirrored the severity of the Great Depression. Back in the 1930s, global stock markets fell by just over 20 per cent in the first 12 months of the Great Depression. In the 12 months to April this year, global stock markets fell by nearly twice that - more than 40 per cent off their peak.
Global industrial output fell by around 13 per cent in the first 12 months of the Great Depression - almost identical to the fall experienced in this recession from the peak in April 2008. Global trade fell by 10 per cent in the first 12 months of the Great Depression. This time it fell by 17 per cent.
But strong action to stabilise financial markets and unprecedented coordinated economic stimulus have helped to rebuild confidence and lay foundations for recovery.
Global stock markets have recovered strongly since their lowest point in March this year. The Dow Jones Index in the US has since risen by 49 per cent, and the Australian All Ordinaries index is now up 46 per cent.
While recovery is still a long way off, the IMF is now projecting a contraction of 1.1 per cent in the global economy this year, while just three months ago in July it had forecast a contraction of 1.4 per cent. Likewise, the IMF has lifted its global growth forecast for 2010 from 2.5 per cent to 3.1 per cent.
Australia has shown remarkable strength compared to the Major Advanced Economies:
     * Australia was the only advanced economy to record positive growth over the year to the June quarter -- growing at 0.6 per cent.
     * We have the second lowest unemployment rate of the Major Advanced Economies.
     * According to the OECD, Australia has a lower projected deficit in 2010 than any of the major advanced economies.
     * We have the lowest debt of all the Major Advanced Economies. Government net debt as a share of GDP for the major advanced economies is projected to increase to 93 per cent. By contrast, Australia's net debt is projected to peak at 10.0 per cent of GDP in 2013-14, before it starts to fall again as our economy moves into a strong period of growth.
The Government responded to the crisis 12 months ago with a guarantee for wholesale funding for APRA regulated banks, building societies, and credit unions. This was an essential step - without it, credit for major projects would have largely seized up and construction projects across the nation would have been stopped in their tracks.
The guarantee enabled the banks to raise much-needed funds to support lending in Australia. Indeed, almost all the offshore and domestic funds raised by Australian banks in the months following the crisis were covered by the guarantee. Only in very recent months are normal lines of offshore borrowings without the guarantee again opening up.
Next we put in place a targeted package of measures, in order to provide stimulus to the economy at a time when the private sector was in retreat. This was designed to specifically target key drivers of growth in the Australian economy, in order to encourage continuing economic activity from households, dwelling construction and private business investment. These measures were supplemented by direct Government investment in infrastructure.
Furthermore, consistent with the principles of conservative economic management, the Government has expanded its role as the private economy has contracted, and will contract the role of government as and when the private economy recovers.
To this end, a total fiscal stimulus program of $77 billion was announced, to provide support to the Australian economy during critical phases of recovery, before being phased out in a controlled manner as the recovery becomes self sustaining.
The immediate stimulus targets of the program included cash payments, support for first home owners and tax breaks to encourage investment by small business.
The medium targets have been local community infrastructure, household energy efficiency, social housing, shovel-ready infrastructure projects, and the largest school modernisation in Australia's history.
Finally, over the long term, the culmination of the program will result in major projects in rail, road, ports, education, research, clean energy, and broadband - all of them nation building projects.
The short-term measures were designed to provide an immediate and substantial boost to the Australian retail and wholesale sectors, thereby compensating for the long lead times associated with major infrastructure investment. This has resulted in retail sales in Australia being 5.2 per cent higher than their levels in November last year, prior to the rollout of the stimulus. In comparison, the retail sales of other advanced economies fell by 1.4 per cent over the same period.
The First Home Owners Boost, combined with lower interest rates, has helped thousands of Australians realise their dream of home ownership. It is also creating jobs and economic activity for you, our builders and tradespeople, at a time when you were facing a major downturn. New figures out last week have shown that the First Home Owners Boost has helped 171,000 first home buyers to enter the housing market -- more than 34,000 of them here in Queensland.
Private house approvals have been increasing strongly since the end of last year and are at their highest level since February 2008. Public approvals have also surged and remain 91 per cent higher than a year ago. Indeed, I know that feedback from MBA members has indicated that stimulus infrastructure construction projects - including first homes - filled the void created by the decline in private building and construction activity.
We also have provided support for business investment by offering a tax break of up to 50 per cent for the purchasing of business equipment - a measure that has supported investment at a time when it faced a severe downturn.
These measures cushioned Australia from the worst effects of the global recession. Without them Australia would have plunged into recession - with close to one million unemployed and with crippling consequences for business and consumer confidence, and without these immediate targeted stimulus measures, Australia's growth would have been minus 1.3 per cent over the year to the June quarter.
Yet there are those who still call for the Government to abandon its fiscal stimulus. This ignores three fundamental facts.
First, the path to global recovery is still far from certain - as confirmed recently by my counterparts at both the G20 in Pittsburgh in September and at the East Asia Summit late last month in Thailand.
Third, the Government's stimulus strategy, 70 per cent of which is being invested in economic and social infrastructure, is precisely what stimulus strategies are intended to be - timely, targeted and temporary.
By the end of the current financial year, two thirds of this stimulus will have been invested. Indeed, the impact of the fiscal stimulus on economic growth has already peaked in the second quarter of 2009. By early 2010, the inbuilt contraction within our strategy, as designed from the start, will already be making a negative contribution to GDP growth.
This will coincide with the ability of the economic recovery to become self-sustaining.
The stimulus has helped build the foundations for sustainable recovery through lifting confidence in the economy. In October, our consumer sentiment index reached its highest point since June 2007. A similar effect is being seen with the surge in business confidence to levels higher than before the global financial crisis.
Nevertheless, the Government remains mindful of the need to make any future adjustments depending on further global and national economic data.
Indeed, Australia's labour market has remained resilient in the face of the global financial crisis, recording positive growth in employment during the past 12 months. This contrasts with falling employment levels across the advanced economies. Even though the level of unemployment is rising, Australia's unemployment rate is 5.7 per cent. With the exception of Japan, this represents the lowest level of unemployment amongst the major advanced economies.
Our economy is expected to operate below capacity for some time, and unemployment is still expected to rise further. However, action taken by the Government has meant that around 200,000 more Australians are in work than would otherwise be the case. Treasury estimates state that in the absence of the stimulus program, unemployment levels would have reached 8¼ per cent.
The global recession has resulted in a collapse of $170 billion in tax revenues. This is the largest such revenue collapse in Australia's history, and it has imposed on us the necessity of a budget deficit until the economy recovers.
However, Australia still remains well placed to recover from the financial crisis. This is due to the fact that Australia has amongst the lowest fiscal deficits of the advanced economies. In addition, Australia's net debt as a percentage of GDP is lower than that of any of the major advanced economies. This fact is underlined by Australia's AAA credit rating, which has been reaffirmed since the budget.
That means making a careful, coordinated exit from the extraordinary fiscal and monetary policy settings and financial market interventions that the crisis demanded. That is what we intend to do - and in a manner that does not weaken the prospects for recovery.
The Reserve Bank has begun to move interest rates from their emergency 50 year lows.
As for fiscal consolidation, this will unfold in two parts: by keeping real expenditure growth to two per cent once trend growth has returned to the economy, and by allowing tax revenues to recover.
Beyond the immediate exit strategy our focus is also on long-term, sustainable productivity growth, growth that is not hostage to the vagaries of the resources boom and bust cycle.
Overall, the Government has provided an additional $77 billion in economic stimulus. Medium-term infrastructure investment represents just over $30 billion of that.
Our nation building projects are supporting:
     * A quality and quantity education revolution;
     * A historic investment in social housing;
     * The largest ever investment in energy efficiency in Australian homes; and
     * Productivity-enhancing infrastructure investment by both the public and private sectors.
Commonwealth, State and Territory Coordinators-General have been overseeing the development, approval, construction and completion of more than 49,000 major construction projects across Australia, construction projects which have, as the MBA noted in its recent quarterly survey, supported a continued rebound in sentiment within the building industry.
The Coordinator General has reported to me that:
     * 49,315 projects have now been approved;
     * 25,596 major projects have commenced; and
     * 1,909 have been completed.
Let me outline developments in each component of the stimulus plan.
First, the Building the Education Revolution component.
There are now 10,498 National School Pride projects underway. There are 349 Science and Language Centres underway. Under Primary Schools for the 21st Century program we have three rounds worth $14.1 billion. Of these:
     * 10,697 projects have been approved
     * 8,003 projects are underway
     * 29 projects are complete
We have also recently introduced new flexibility into the timing for building projects to help all schools achieve the best value for money.
Delivery of the Social Housing Initiative is on track. Work has been completed on 35,935 of the 60,680 dwellings approved for repairs and maintenance work. Some 19,321 dwellings have been approved for construction, with 2,659 houses underway and 118 houses completed. Further, the average cost per dwelling is now expected to be about $270,000, well under the $300,000 initial estimates.
Our investment in social housing is critical to supporting businesses here on the Gold Coast. It is providing jobs for the hundreds of workers involved - the builders, plumbers, carpenters, electricians, brickies, carpet-layers, kitchen manufacturers and many more in the building and construction industry.
On the Gold Coast alone, we have already invested $5 million in 1,217 repair and maintenance jobs and $8.5 million in 28 new homes under Stage 1 one that have started construction and are expected to be completed by the end of 2009. 
To build on this investment, today I am pleased to announce that under Stage 2 of the Social Housing Initiative, a further 543 dwellings will be built, pumping an extra $144 million into the Gold Coast's building and construction sector.
This investment will support the sector in the medium term and provide long term secure housing for hundreds of families in need.
Defence Housing Australia, which has been allocated $246 million to construct 802 homes, is well ahead of schedule against its planned project milestones. Major site works have commenced on 570 houses and 142 houses have been completed.
All 14 major road projects under the plan are approved and are scheduled to be completed by 30 June 2014. Black spots projects are under construction and are on track to be completed by 30 June 2010. Of the 17 major ARTC rail projects, 14 projects are underway and three are completed.
Of the 292 Boom Gate projects, which include a range of safety measures at rail level crossings around the nation, 93 are underway and 54 projects have already been completed. All projects are on track to be completed by 30 June 2010.
Under our Regional and Local Community Infrastructure program, we are providing new and upgraded facilities to address the different needs of communities across the nation. In some places, this means something as simple as upgrading footpaths.
Here on the Gold Coast, it means a major $36 million Commonwealth investment in the redevelopment of the Gold Coast Stadium sports complex - a new 25,000 seat AFL and sports stadium at Carrara. The project, which is now underway, will support up to 950 full-time jobs during construction. The AFL expects it to generate $415 million of economic activity over a ten year period. This is one of 137 large community infrastructure projects, of which 58 are already underway.
In addition, more than 85 per cent of the 3,220 smaller community infrastructure projects are completed. These have provided work for building and construction businesses during the downturn, and they will leave a lasting benefit for communities across the nation.
The Energy Efficient Homes package focuses on straight-forward, cost-effective measures that households can take to reduce their power bills and greenhouse gas emissions. Over 90,000 homes have now claimed Solar Hot Water Rebates. The Homeowner Insulation Program has been very successful with more than 500,000 homes insulated, with over $700 million paid. We have also recently announced improvements to the insulation program to improve consumer protection, strengthen safety measures and improve value for money.
This program has supported jobs with around 8,000 registered businesses employing over 12,000 individual installers. In addition, manufacturing plants have added shifts to operate around the clock, generating further employment.
I appreciate the way that Master Builders Australia and your members have risen to the challenge of the most ambitious nation-building recovery plan in Australian history. When you consider the scale of what has been undertaken, the industry's achievement has been exceptional. I also thank the Commonwealth Coordinator General who has done an excellent job under great pressure.
Every day, Australians around the nation are reaping benefits from the Nation Building - Economic Stimulus Plan: Jobs and economic activity in their communities; new school facilities; new infrastructure for communities to share over summer; and in the months ahead, improved energy efficiency, clean and safe homes, and quicker trips in the car.
Implementing the Nation Building - Economic Stimulus Plan has been an enormous undertaking, but it has only begun to address the infrastructure gaps confronting Australia, so our partnership must continue to strengthen in the years ahead, as we build a stronger economy for a bigger Australia.
It gives me great pleasure to declare this conference open. 


I am delighted to be here today in New Delhi.
I would have been equally delighted to have been in Mumbai last night at the DY Patel Stadium. 
But alas the weather gods intervened. 
India shares many passions with Australia, one of them being our collective celebration of cricket.
We share a passion for the game. 
But in my case, there has never been a correlation between passion on the one hand and ability on the other. 
You will be surprised to learn however that I have played against India before. 
At least as a member of the Australian embassy team in Peking against the Indian embassy team. 
My highest score was 11 not out. 
We Australians always feared the Indian quicks and we feared that the reason India regularly beat us at the Temple of Heaven Ground was out belief that on the eve of each of the games, Indian MEA would fly in its best talent from Delhi. 
At least that's my excuse for failure on the field - 11 not out. 
But, as someone who can recognise great talent when I see it, I congratulate Sachin Tendulkar on achieving the outstanding milestone of 17,000 One-Day International runs. 
From one cricket mad nation to another, we salute the 'Little Master'.
I'm advised his young teammate Yuvraj Singh has started calling the 36 year old 'grandfather' (where that places 52 year old like me, I'm not sure).
And may I say on behalf of all Australian cricket fans that if Sachin does decide it is time to retire, we would support him wholeheartedly.
Of course there is more to life than cricket.
Another of our shared passions is exploring new opportunities for business collaboration.
Looking out to this diverse audience - business leaders, senior officials and commentators from all corners of the private and public sectors - I am struck by the extent of common Australian and Indian commercial interests. 
I am also reminded of the central role business will play in elevating our countries' bilateral partnership. 
Our venue today - The Taj Mahal Hotel - is a testament to this.
I am told this hotel is owned by the renowned Tata Group. 
It takes shrewd leadership to preserve and build a business group from one generation to the next. 
But it takes remarkable ability to sustain such a business over not one but five generations. 
This is exactly what the Tata family has achieved over the past 140 years, making it a pillar of the Indian business community - and also 32 years older than the Australian constitution!
It is a great compliment to Australian business that the Tata Group has decided to partner with Australian companies in fields as diverse as coated steel production, long-haul logistics and retail electronics. 
These partnerships demonstrate the power of entrepreneurialism: when we join commercial vision with complementary capacity, the possibilities are endless.
The same is true of the Australian-Indian economic relationship as a whole.
In the past 18 months, business men and women around the world have together faced the worst financial collapse in three quarters of a century. 
We all know the figures - the global economy is forecast to contract by 1.1 per cent in 2009 - the first contraction since IMF records began. 
This is the deepest global recession in three-quarters of a century and very few countries have escaped the downturn.
From this crisis, one startling fact has become apparent: our economies are more interconnected and interdependent now than ever before. 
The economic crisis is, at its core, a crisis of globally interconnected credit markets. 
While it started in the US, UK and Europe, the financial and trade impacts quickly spread to the rest of the world. 
No nation was immune to the downturn.
But while our interdependence exposes us to great risk, it also creates great potential.
Our coordinated response to the global economic crisis - driven by the G20 in which Australia and India are active- has highlighted the benefits of cooperation. 
It reminds us that global solutions to crises are through collective determination and action rather than insular policies.
It has provided the strongest signal yet that the global economy has entered a new - though fragile - phase of recovery.
But Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke has warned that the early recovery won't be robust enough to prevent the unemployment rate  -  now at a 26-year high of 10.2 per cent  -  continuing to rise in the months ahead.
So while there is tentative talk of recovery, it is still a long way off.
The recovery will be slow and complex. 
IMF Chief Economist Olivier Blanchard, writing in the IMF's magazine, warned that this recession is not normal.
Sustaining any recovery will require delicate rebalancing acts, both within and across countries.
As he rightly observes, and I quote:
".... the world is not in a run-of-the mill recession. The turnaround will not be simple. The crisis has left deep scars, which will affect both supply and demand for many years to come."
Global economic activity, driven by the strong performance of Asian economies such as India and China, still remains below pre-crisis levels. 
Private consumption and investment are needed to sustain this recovery. 
This requires a smooth transition from government-supported demand to private-led demand. 
We also need to unwind the global imbalances that led us into this crisis. 
And this is why forums such as this are critical for progressing the conversation between governments and with businesses on how we can build long-term, sustainable growth for the future. 
My message to the global community is simple: we're all in this together, and we're all in this for the long haul. 
So what does Australia have to bring to the table?
     * Strong fundamentals;
     * A stable, prosperous economy; and
     * An ongoing economic policy reform agenda.
Like India, the Australian economy has weathered the global recession better than most:
     * our economy grew in the June quarter at 0.6 per cent, making it the fastest-growing advanced economy in the past year and the only advanced economy to have reported positive through-the-year growth to June 2009; and
     * while every Major Advanced Economy has fallen into recession, Australia so far has not.
     * But still, as the slight rise in our unemployment rate to 5.8 per cent today underlines, Australia is by no means out of the woods, yet - as we still face such a fundamentally uncertain global economic outlook.
Australia is a significant economy. 
We are the 14th largest economy in the world. 
By market exchange rates, Australia is the fourth largest economy in Asia - after Japan, China and India, and the fourteenth largest in the world. 
We have the second lowest unemployment rate when compared with the Major Advanced Economies.
Our public finances are sound, with Standard and Poor's reaffirming our AAA sovereign rating. 
According to the OECD, Australia is projected to have a lower deficit in 2010 than any of the Major Advanced Economies.
We also have the lowest debt of all the Major Advanced Economies, with government net debt projected to peak at 10 per cent of GDP in 2013. 
Australia is globally acknowledged for our resilient banking system and strong prudential and regulatory regimes:
     * Of the world's nine remaining AA plus rated banks, four are Australian; and
     * The percentage of nonperforming bank-to-bank loans in Australia is among the lowest in the world.
The strength of our banking system reflects a strong set of regulatory arrangements and a smart industry model. 
Most significantly, Australia prides itself as a good place to do business. 
In its 2009 survey, IMD rated Australia as one of the four most resilient economies globally, and the strongest in our region.
The World Bank ranked Australia as one of the most business-friendly economies in the world, offering a business environment that is both stable and flexible. 
And our corporate governance environment has also been ranked first by - based on measures like:
     * The transparency of our business and regulatory culture;
     * The power and rights our shareholders enjoy; and
     * The interaction between Government and business.
When coupled with a deep, mature financial sector, Australian Government reforms to drive productivity growth and low debt and deficit levels by any global standards, Australia offers a safe and rewarding environment to conduct 21st century business.
Economic reform has set Australia on a path of sustainable growth, as have the reforms set in train in India back in 1991. 
The impacts of these reforms are palpable. 
India's strategic weight and the structure of its economy have seen it withstand the impacts of the global economic crisis better than most. 
India has managed an impressive six per cent growth at a time when few other economies have managed any growth at all. 
India has truly emerged as a central pillar of regional and global economic strength and significance. 
In 2010 almost 90 per cent of global growth will come from emerging economies; and 
By 2014 the IMF projects that emerging Asian economies will contribute to half of world GDP growth, of which 10 per cent will come from India. 
But the great upswing in India's growth does not end there. 
By 2030, India will have the world's largest population and be the third largest economy.
When combined with advances in technology, education, services, resources and security, all of this equates to one thing - opportunity. 
Opportunities for Indian citizens domestically and abroad. 
Opportunities for stronger regional growth and cooperation. 
And opportunities for stronger commercial links between Australia and India. 
When it comes to encouraging greater commercial cooperation with India, the Australian Government means business. 
India is already Australia's fastest growing major two-way trading partner - trade in goods was worth nearly $18 billion in 2008-09.
Our services exports to India are growing - $2.9 billion in 2008.
As is our foreign direct investment relationship, albeit off a low base. 
One important part of our relationship is of course the large number of Indian students who come to Australia - nearly one-fifth of the half a million students who come to our country.
These students represent the future of Indian and Australian business - and those who study together, stick together. 
And the Australian Government is committed to doing all that is physically responsible to ensure all international students in Australia have a safe and rewarding experience during their time as welcome guests in our nation.
Indian students are welcome guests in our country and we have an obligation to extend the hand of friendship and support to all our Indian visitors.
When we look at the wider economic relationship between our two countries, I am firmly of the view that we can do more. 
India is a dynamic and diversified economy with an acknowledged infrastructure deficit and challenges in meeting the growing food and energy needs of its burgeoning population. 
Australia is a resource-rich country with a relatively small domestic market but a number of compelling comparative advantages, particularly in energy and resources. 
India is itself richly endowed with many mineral and energy resources. 
And so there is significant potential for reciprocal investment in our resource sectors.
Mining exports are already the largest component of our bilateral trade. 
Some of Australia's biggest companies - Rio Tinto and BHP Billiton - have strong and enduring bonds with India. 
Meanwhile, Indian investors in Australia such as NRE Coke are helping Australian resources reach Indian markets. 
In August this year, India's Petronet LNG signed a 20-year agreement with Exxon Mobil Australia, securing the supply of 1.5 million tonnes of LNG per annum from Australia's Gorgon field. 
This is the first of what I hope will be many strategic energy deals. 
Likewise in the agricultural sector, Australia and India have much to gain from each other. 
Australia can meet domestic shortfalls in Indian production. 
And there are opportunities for two-way trade in seasonal items on a counter-seasonal basis. 
One area of cooperation that I am particularly excited about is the prospect of new technologies to support green growth. 
New and renewable energy is critical to our broader efforts to address climate change. 
India is a founding member of the Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute established by Australia to advance commercialisation of important climate technologies. 
The Australia-India Strategic Research Fund - Australia's largest bilateral science fund - has also strengthened the ties between our best and brightest scientists. 
Together, we can work to develop and trial commercially viable sources of renewable energy and low-carbon growth.
Of course, the commercial opportunities I have outlined today would be greatly strengthened through an Australia-India Free Trade Agreement. 
An FTA which is truly liberalising across all sectors, and consistent with our multilateral trading objectives, would enhance our trading relationship. 
Experience has shown us that greater ambition in an FTA means greater rewards. 
I firmly believe that a comprehensive, commercially-meaningful FTA between Australia and India could deliver substantial new market access for exporters and investors, and open up job opportunities in both countries. 
And this is good news for us all. 
The feasibility study into an FTA between our two countries is nearly complete, and I expect it to recommend in favour of commencing FTA negotiations soon - something I strongly support.
Our growing commercial links are already being reinforced through greater cooperation between Australia and India on the world stage. 
The designation of the G20 as the premier forum for global economic cooperation was an historic occasion for India and Australia. 
It also endorses the success of G20 in coordinating a global response to the economic crisis. 
And it reaffirms the central role of key emerging economies - particularly India - as the engine of global growth. 
But complacency is not an option. 
The ultimate success of the G20 forum rests in implementation of its important agenda. 
G20 leaders recognised that a strong, stable and balanced global economy relies on:
     * strengthened financial regulation;
     * representative, legitimate and well-resourced international financial institutions;
     * an open trading system;
     * strong labour markets; and
     * support for those most in need.
And I am pleased to say that Australia and India are working together to address these five key challenges. 
I firmly believe the G20 is the right forum for the future. 
We know what the global economic challenges are. 
And these impact on our countries and our region. 
The challenge going forward is how we ensure our region is playing its part in the global economic agenda.
I welcome the recognition by EAS Leaders at their October Summit of the need to initiate an EAS Finance Ministers' process. 
This is an important step towards greater economic cooperation in the region.
We must learn from the past.
As Bob Zoellick, President of the World Bank Group, said in September, and I quote:
"Today's upheaval did not occur from nowhere. The seeds were planted earlier."
And we must look to the future.
We have the economic potential and commercial creativity to build on our existing commercial links. 
Governments have a responsibility in unlocking this economic potential, and this is one of the key challenges I will be discussing with Prime Minister Singh. 
But that's only part of the story. 
Business leaders have an important role in recognising commercial opportunities and pursuing them - whether they are in Mumbai or Melbourne. 
That's why I'm delighted that our Trade and Commerce Ministers have agreed to establish a CEO forum to bring together the business elites of our two countries to discuss opportunities and impediments to greater economic cooperation. 
And I look forward to reading their recommendations in 2010 on what governments can do. 
After all, enhancing commercial cooperation between our two countries is a central pillar of the Australia-India strategic partnership and an opportunity to bring our countries closer together. 
This is an opportunity we just can't pass up.


It is indeed a great honour to be here in Delhi and to have the opportunity to address such a distinguished audience on the future of Australia's relationship with India.
It is also an honour that I speak to you today as a guest of the Indian Council of World Affairs which has such a rich tradition of nurturing international relations since its inception in 1943.
And further to speak to you in this building whose foundation stone was laid by India's Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru in 1950.
Walking into Sapru House you feel immediately immersed in the sense of purpose of this great institution.
An institution that over the decades has hosted so many critical meetings that have demonstrated India's long-standing desire for international understanding, engagement and the development of a peaceful and prosperous international order.
I am delighted that today the annual Australia India Roundtable, co-hosted by the Lowy Institute and the Indian Council of World Affairs, is taking place in the room next door.
There is much to be had in the exchange of ideas because ideas have so much power to shape how we see the world, how we act in the world - and how we shape our world's future together.
30 years ago, as a student at the Australian National University, I became fascinated by the study of Asia.
I became fascinated by the conceptualisations of Asia from the continent itself.
I became fascinated by the vision of Asia's future as captured 30 years earlier by Prime Minister Nehru and the newly emerging modern India.
With the benefit of the hindsight of more than 60 years, Nehru's vision expressed at the Asia Relations Conference he convened in Delhi in April 1947 on the eve of India's independence is remarkable.
As Nehru observed:
"We stand at the end of an era and on the threshold of a new period of history. Standing on this watershed which divides two epochs of human history and endeavour, we can look back on our long past and look forward to the future that is taking shape before our eyes. Asia ... has suddenly become important again in world affairs. If we view the millennia of history, this continent of Asia ... has played a mighty role in the evolution of humanity. It was there that civilisation began and man started on his unending adventure of life. Here the mind of man searched unceasingly for truth and the spirit of man shone out like a beacon which lightened up the whole world."
Reflecting on the international conference which he audaciously convened some months before India's independence, Nehru continued:
"Today this isolation (of Asia) is breaking down because of many reasons, political and other. The imperialisms are fading away.... This Conference itself is significant as an expression of that deeper urge to the mind and spirit of Asia which has persisted in spite of the isolationism which grew up during the years of European domination. As that domination goes, the walls that surrounded us fall down and we look at each other again and meet as old friends long parted. In this Conference and in this work there are no leaders and no followers. All countries of Asia have to meet together on an equal basis in a common task and endeavour."
Speaking a decade before I was even born, Nehru saw already what we have now witnessed: the rise of Asia following centuries of European colonialism to become the centre of global strategic and economic gravity that beckons for the century ahead.
I am a graduate in Asian Studies at the Australian National University.
A great university that brought together the systematic study of the high civilisations of East Asia (my own specialisation), South Asia, Central Asia and South-East Asia.
It was during my undergraduate days that I had the great privilege studying from time to time at the feet of the great professor Arthur Basham.
His enduring masterpiece The Wonder That Was India became required reading.
When I say required, it was not that we were forced to read it.
It was that Basham's passion for Indian civilisation was infectious.
This seminal book was recently re-issued here in India - suggesting that Basham's judgments have stood the test of time.
Basham sitting in his study patiently introduced me to the impact of India on China through the arrival of waves of Indian Buddhist missionaries from the Han to the Tang - bringing with them entirely different notions of the role of the state to that which had already become entrenched through China's Confucianism.
Basham, in my memory of him, was a great scholar, a patient teacher, and an extraordinary Anglo-Australian exponent of Indian civilisation and her great influence around the world over the centuries - whether in religion, philosophy, culture, science, commerce or politics.
Including through the 13th century centre of Buddhist learning, Nalanda University, that helped to spread Indian thought across Asia.
And can I say that Australia is pleased to support Prime Minister Singh's intention to revive this great regional centre of learning.
Of course, India's contribution to the world is both ancient and modern.
Ancient through the power of its civilisation.
Modern through its great example as the world's biggest democracy.
Modern through the impact of its economy, its science and its technology.
Modern also in India's engagement in the institutions of global and regional governance and the great challenges of our time.
It is here where India and Australia have a common history and a common future.
Our bilateral and broader regional engagement extends back to the first days of independence.
I referred earlier to Nehru's 1947 initiative in convening the first pan-Asian conference in New Delhi.
What is important to note here is that Australia also attended that conference as an observer - at Nehru's invitation.
As Nehru observed in his opening remarks:
"We welcome also observers from Australia and New Zealand because we have many problems in common, especially in the Pacific and in the Southeast region of Asia, and we have to co-operate together to find solutions."
Nehru's insights on Australia's common destiny with India and our wider region were shared on the Australian side, under Australia's Labor Government of Prime Minister Chifley.
As Chifley's foreign minister Herbert Vere ("Doc") Evatt said on the occasion of India's independence in 1947:
"Our geographical proximity and our common interest in the affairs of the Indian Ocean and South-East Asia naturally throw our lots closely together." 
Australia has therefore long recognised that India's strategic importance to us extends well beyond the Indian Ocean.
In a publication by the Indian Council of World Affairs on regional security in 1948, Foreign Minister Evatt also wrote:
"In any approach to the problem of organising security in the Pacific, Australia naturally recognises the special position of India." 
For his part, Nehru not only recognised Australia's role in Asia, he welcomed it.
Speaking at the Asian-African Conference in Bandung, Indonesia in 1955, Nehru sent his greetings to us, saying, and I quote:
"Australia and New Zealand are almost in our region. They certainly do not belong to Europe, much less to America. They are next to us and I should like Australia and New Zealand to come nearer to Asia."
Since Nehru spoke those words, Australia over the decades has become an integral part of the region.
My central message to you today is that the Australian Government sees the strengthening of the Australia-India relationship as a natural extension of Nehru's original vision.
Furthermore, it is time we simply both got on with it.
And here I would like to become a blunt Australian, if you will forgive me.
For too long there has been a waxing and a waning interest between our two countries.
We keep rediscovering each other, only to then lose our way.
When Australian Foreign Minister, Stephen Smith, addressed the Indian Council of World Affairs in September last year, he described our relationship like this, and I quote:
"Australia's past approach to India has been like a 20/20 cricket match: short bursts of enthusiasm followed by lengthy periods of inactivity."
But as the Foreign Minister also said, that 'period of fits and starts is over'.
This relationship is bigger, much bigger, than the classical "three c's" of cricket, the Commonwealth and a common language.
And the time has well and truly come to lift our vision.
To broaden our engagement.
And more than half a century later, to realise the ambitions of our political forebears.
Because together, there is much we can do for each other - and for the peace and prosperity of the region and the world.
As Prime Minister of Australia, my objective is to build a comprehensive, enduring strategic partnership between Australia and India that will not result in yet another false dawn.
The important economic and strategic links between Australia and India that our predecessors identified over half a century ago only continue to grow, making it never more opportune than now to cement a significant and lasting partnership for the 21st century.
It is on this that I would like to focus the remainder of my remarks:
     * First, I would like to give you a brief sense of how I see Australia's place in the world in the context of India's changing place in the world;
     * Second, I will summarise the scope I see for strengthening the bilateral relationship; and
     * Third, I will outline where changing global and regional dynamics present even further scope for Australia and India to work together for mutual benefit.
Australia and India are no longer the countries of the 1940s.
We have both changed.
And with this change, our interests have come ever closer together.
I describe Australia as a middle power committed to the principles of creative middle-power diplomacy.
Meaning that we both have global and regional interests, and the resources, capabilities and outlook to prosecute these interests and to protect them.
Australia is the 14th largest economy in the world.
And the fourth largest in Asia after Japan, China and India.
We have the fourth largest pool of funds under management globally.
Our stock exchange is the second-largest in the region after Japan.
And we have a dynamic and resilient economy.
Australia was the only member of the 33-member OECD so far not to go into recession - but in fact grew - in the face of the Global Economic Crisis.
Of the world's nine remaining AA+ rated banks, four are Australian.
We have the lowest debt of all major advanced economies, and the second-lowest unemployment rate.
Australia has the 13th largest military budget worldwide, the fifth largest in Asia.
We are among the top 10 military contributors in Afghanistan, and the largest non-NATO contributor.
We have forces serving in 13 countries around the world.
Australia is now fundamentally enmeshed in Asia.
Seven of our top 10 export markets are in Asia.
Over 60 per cent of our exports go to Asian markets.
And last year close to 300,000 students from Asia came to study in Australia.
Australia is spearheading efforts in the Pacific region to secure stability and security for small island states, including our leading role in supporting the establishment of newly independent East Timor, stabilising the Solomon Islands and pressing for an early return to democracy in Fiji.
We are also a recognised and active player in confronting global challenges:
     * first, through our membership - along with India - of the G20, we are members of the premier institution of global economic governance;
     * second, through Australia playing a leading role in addressing the pressing global challenge of climate change, and
     * third, through Australia's establishment - with Japan - of the International Commission on Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament - which will deliver its seminal report in the months ahead.
Australia's society is also changing as our engagement with our region deepens.
Over the past few decades, Australia has transformed from a predominantly Anglo-Celtic society to a vibrant, multicultural community.
Our people speak more than 300 languages, with nearly one-third of our people having migrated to Australia since 1945.
Today close to half - 43 percent - of the Australian population was born overseas or have a parent who was born overseas.
So in summary, the Australia of the 21st Century is a modern, democratic, diverse and prosperous nation with both global and regional interests and pursuing an activist policy of international engagement in the prosecution of those interests.
For India's future, this audience is more familiar with the complexity of this narrative than any visiting Australian Prime Minister, but please allow me to present an Australian perspective.
India is emerging as a significant global power.
India is also a critical country in the region to which the centre of global strategic and economic weight for the century ahead is now shifting.
By 2030, India is projected to overtake China as having the world's largest population.
Economically, India looks set for steady, robust growth - with India's economy last year exceeding US$1 trillion.
Some forecast India will be the world's third-largest economy by 2025.
This comes from sustained economic reform, sound macro-economic management and rapidly growing international trade and investment - policies pioneered by your prime minister in the early 90s, which have dramatically lowered rates of poverty in India over the last 15 years.
India is also expanding its strategic reach and capabilities.
It is forging closer links with the United States and leaving a larger footprint across the Indian Ocean. 
The Indian Navy is the fifth-largest in the world.
Globally, India is increasingly engaging in and exerting influence through the multilateral system - whether in the UN, G20, the East Asia Summit or beyond.
India is a confident, outward-looking power intent on securing its rightful place in the world through an active foreign policy firmly anchored in her national interests.
In short, India is going to play a more prominent role in shaping global and regional security and prosperity.
India is a democracy.
India's priority is economic growth.
India has deep and abiding commitment to regional peace.
As the balance of power in Asia shifts and evolves, these attributes will become even more important.
Australia seeks a region where the peace and prosperity of the last several decades continues into the future.
It is crucial that the shifts in economic power from west to east do not open the door to instability and conflict.
History teaches us that times of change in the distribution of global power can be potentially dangerous.
And this is why an India which is economically strong, an India anchored in the principles of pluralism and political democracy, an India deeply committed to the building of the global and regional institutions of cooperation is so important.
I strongly believe that Australia and India, as never before, are in a place where we have a great deal to offer each other.
And that it is in our mutual interests to maximise the opportunities this presents for our mutual advantage.
I envisage a strategic partnership with India where we can build a long-term comprehensive and integrated relationship that covers the economic, political, security and cultural spectrum.
I believe both our governments now recognise this potential.
If senior level visits are any guide, we have had a record 10 Indian Ministers visit Australia since early 2008.
Nine Australian Ministers have visited India in the same period.
I make up the 10 to equal the score.
So both our teams on the field of play are well deployed.
On the economic front, India is now Australia's fifth largest export market for goods and services, and is rapidly moving to become our third largest export market.
It is our fastest growing major merchandise export market.
This is built on a strong foundation of mineral and petroleum resources and energy.
But India is also now the sixth largest market for Australia's services, such as information and communications technology, education, tourism, finance, mining, construction and software development.
From India's point of view - as the world's fifth largest energy consumer - there is a real and growing interest in Australia as a reliable, cost-competitive and long-term supplier of energy.
I would like to see us forge a strong energy partnership.
We have made a strong start.
We are working together under five Action Plans in the areas of mines, coal, new and renewable energy, petroleum and natural gas and power.
Indian companies are also making significant investments in Australia.
In August, India's Petronet LNG signed a US$20 billion deal with Exxon-Mobil for the new Gorgon project in Western Australia.
This was the first long-term gas contract between our two nations.
I appreciate that there is one aspect of the energy relationship which remains unresolved: Australia's long-standing position on the export of uranium to countries that are not party to the Non-Proliferation Treaty.
This is not a policy directed at India.
It applies globally and it has since 1978 under different Australian Governments.
We have not sought to isolate India on critical nuclear policy concerns.
In fact the reverse is true.
Australia was an active supporter in the Nuclear Suppliers Group of lifting the nuclear moratorium against India following the US-India nuclear deal.
This reflected Australia's appreciation of India's non-proliferation record.
The government understands that India looks to the day when its ambitious civil nuclear energy program can include Australian uranium.
The strength of the India-Australia relationship is reflected in the capacity of both governments to work beyond this different policy approach.
And it still leaves plenty of room to build an enduring energy partnership at a time when growing competition for energy and energy resources places a premium on such a partnership.
On the broader trade and investment relationship, I welcome the imminent conclusion of the joint feasibility study on a prospective Free Trade Agreement between Australia and India.
I expect the study to recommend in favour of a bilateral FTA and look forward to launching negotiations soon after.
I look forward to building an open trade and investment relationship with India - as we pursue similar FTAs with the other major economies of the region including Japan, China and Korea.
This includes intensification of our collaboration in science and technology.
Today Australia and India will launch a $100 million collaboration project on science and technology.
Both our countries have strong traditions in the physical and life sciences and related technologies and I believe the potential in these fields is vast.
Whether related to strategic change in East Asia; combating terrorism (including in Afghanistan); ensuring maritime security; acting on transnational crimes including people smuggling; or working together on new security challenges such as natural disasters - there is great scope for security cooperation between our two countries to broaden further.
Our defence forces are intensifying cooperation, with over 50 activities last year including joint exercises, and in particular maritime exercises.
This year we also inaugurated regular defence talks between the chiefs of our defence forces, and strengthened intelligence and counter-terrorism cooperation.
I am committed to seeing this security cooperation strengthen between our two countries.
I believe this is in both our interests and the interest of long-term regional stability.
Another area of increasingly tapped potential is our people-to-people links.
Around 250,000 people of Indian heritage live in Australia, and we value the contribution they bring to our society, our economy, our nation.
Last year 115,000 Indian citizens visited Australia.
We also have close to 100,000 Indian students studying in our country, with India recently overtaking China to become the largest source of overseas students in Australia.
On current estimates, there is a shortfall of 1.6 million university places in India and this gap is increasing, making our partnership in this area increasingly important to meet the education needs of Indian students.
As you all probably know, there has been recent controversy over a series of attacks on Indian students in Australia.
As Prime Minister of Australia, I am deeply disturbed and disgusted by attacks of violence against any foreign students studying in our country as our guests.
They have been criminal attacks targeting Indian students for the little money they earn to support their studies.
These attacks will not be tolerated.
They will be dealt with by the full force of the Australian law enforcement and criminal justice systems.
The Australian Government is working with all our state governments to make sure everything is done to protect overseas students and make their experience in Australia a positive one.
The Australian Government is committed to doing its utmost to guarantee that the sons and daughters Indian parents entrust to the care of the Australian community remain safe and come home with a valuable education and wonderful memories.
No government can guarantee that no acts of violence will occur.
But let us calmly work together to deal with future challenges as they arise.
I would like to end today by focusing on what I see as the growing scope for Australia and India to work together on global and regional challenges.
We are now less than 30 days away from the 15th Conference of the Parties in Copenhagen.
This meeting is an historic opportunity to tackle perhaps the greatest environmental challenge of our time.
This is not a challenge that any country can meet alone.
Leadership from major emerging countries - especially India - will be essential if we are to see a global deal on climate change in Copenhagen in December.
Already India has made significant domestic commitments through its National Action Plan on Climate Change.
The plan is an ambitious set of actions across energy efficiency, solar power and forestry.
The world was encouraged and inspired by Prime Minister Singh's statement made at the New York UN Summit that India is willing to quantify its emission reductions and contribute to the global goal of reducing emissions.
And today I am looking forward to building on our bilateral climate change cooperation between, including through the Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute and the Asia-Pacific Partnership on Clean Development and Climate (APP).
The global economy of today is more inter-connected, complex and interdependent than ever before.
There is no better illustration of this fact than the way in which the recent financial crisis in the US quickly spread to the UK, Europe and then the rest of the world, causing the global economic crisis and the first contraction in the global economy since IMF records began.
The lesson of this crisis has been that in our inter-connected world, cooperation is vital.
One of the most important challenges for Australia this year has been working with India and others in the G20 to frame and implement a global policy response to the gravest economic crisis we have confronted since the great depression.
The G20 brings together economies representing:
     * around 90 per cent of global market capitalisation;
     * around 85 per cent of global GDP;
     * around 80 per cent of global trade; and
     * more than two-thirds of the world's population.
The G20 also draws together:
     * five countries from the Americas;
     * five from Asia;
     * five from Europe; and
     * five from elsewhere, including South Africa, Russia and Australia.
Critically it includes India and China which, between them, will shape the pattern of history in the 21st century.
In this, you are seeing a rebalancing of global architecture to reflect new global economic and strategic realities.
This is something that Australia strongly supports, and we played a key role in pressing for this rebalancing, including through leading G20 work on IMF reform, to better reflect the growing economic weight of emerging economies such as India.
Throughout this year, we in the G20 have taken decisions on:
     * global financial stimulus;
     * a global framework for toxic asset management within banks;
     * the resourcing of the IMF to deal with any future institutional collapses;
     * the implementation of extensive financial sector reforms; and
     * measures against trade protectionism.
The IMF has estimated that actions stemming from the London G20 Summit in March this year actually cushioned the global economy which had been in virtual freefall since the preceding September.
At the G20 Pittsburgh Summit in September, we agreed on a series of measures to shore up sustained and balanced global economic growth into the future, and to entrench the G20 as the world's premier economic forum.
In all this, Australia and India are working together as never before on matters that affect the wellbeing of literally everyone on this planet.
I look forward to working with India on this great global endeavour.
Finally, Australia and India should be natural partners in the Asia-Pacific.
We both have long-established, significant and growing interests in this region.
We have a shared vision in seeing habits of cooperation - and not conflict - develop, as the centre of economic and strategic gravity shifts to this region over coming decades.
This is why we so strongly support Indian participation in all the key regional forums.
Such as the East Asia Summit.
Such as the ASEAN Regional Forum.
And that is why we support India's membership of APEC.
It is also why I see India as central to Australia's proposal for an Asia-Pacific Community by 2020.
In proposing this initiative I am guided by a simple but deep conviction.
That we can act to shape a future that we want to have.
Or be passive as the future shapes us in ways we wish it never had.
The challenge of the Asia-Pacific is to manage the inevitable stresses and strains of shifting economic and strategic contours.
The Asia Pacific is where the big power relationships most closely intersect.
It is the crucible where the relationships among the US, India, China, Japan and Russia are forged.
It is here also that the template for the US-China relationship will emerge and where the complementary and competitive interests of the major powers will need to be managed, harmonised and reconciled.
We need strong regional engagement and a strong regional mechanism to ensure that strategic cooperation rather than friction - or worse, strategic polarisation - prevails.
Nobody wants a strategic fault line through Asia.
Nor should anybody see such a fault line as inevitable.
We also need a strong mechanism to deal with the host of other pressures that will come to bear in the Asia-Pacific such as:
     * increasing potential for regional strategic and territorial competition;
     * competition for scarce resources;
     * the challenges of pollution, energy security, counter-terrorism, people smuggling and climate change; and
     * the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
There is also the continued challenge of strengthening regional economic integration in increasingly interdependent regional economies.
I would like to see an Asia Pacific Community evolve with the ability to address this spectrum of economic, political and security challenges.
At present, none of the current regional institutions do this.
There is growing regional recognition of this fact.
And there is growing interest in discussing the creation of the right mechanism to help manage what will be an increasingly crowded strategic landscape.
This discussion will continue at a conference Australia is hosting in early December in Sydney, and I look forward to strong Indian participation.
Australia and India are heavily engaged on many levels across the economic, political, security and other spheres. 
We are both pluralist democracies.
We are both significant economies.
We are both globally engaged.
We both seek to forge our national wealth through open economies.
And we both want to see the stability of Asia underpinned by principles of open regionalism, the peaceful settlement of disputes, and the creation of multilateral institutions that engender strategic confidence and transparency.
Ours is a relationship growing fast but with much room to grow further.
We should seize the opportunities that our converging interests create.
Now is the time to broaden and deepen this relationship.
To develop the structural linkages across our economies which will serve us well in the long term.
To build our shared strategic interests in Asia and the Indian Ocean.
To reinvigorate the way we work together in multilateral forums.
And to use the ties of migration, education, cultural exchange and tourism to broaden the engagement between our two societies.
This is why I want to see us be ambitious in the relationship.
To forge a genuine strategic partnership underpinned by strong economic, energy and security frameworks that deliver lasting mutual benefits for our peoples and for the peoples of this great region of the 21st century - Asia.
To conclude, where I began, with Prime Minister Nehru who concluded his remarks at that 1947 conference on Asia's future as follows:
"We meet here not to discuss our past history and contacts but to forge links for the future.
...
"There is a new vitality and powerful creative impulse in all the peoples of Asia...Strong winds are blowing all over Asia. Let us not be afraid of them but rather welcome them for only with their help can we build the new Asia of our dreams."
Somewhat less profoundly perhaps, Prime Minister Nehru reflected elsewhere his view that:
"Life is like a game of cards. The hand you are dealt is determinism; the way you play it is free will".
This perhaps has a particular resonance for our two great nations as together we seek to shape our region's future.
Australia and India have been dealt highly complementary hands.
And now we have the choice to make the best of them.
And I believe we shall.


It is indeed an honour to be back in Singapore, and to be at your National University.
A university with its own virtual university - creating a student co-designed, co-built and co-owned campus in the virtual world.
I'm told you can create your own avatar and make your way around the virtual campus.
I'm not sure if you can get a virtual degree - but if it were my university student son, he would be equally keen on the idea of virtual exams, and virtual assignments as well.
It's great to be here today with so many young people from the university and the schools.
You are the future of this extraordinary island Republic.
And I know that you share many aspirations with the young people of Australia.
To feel confident about the quality of the educational opportunities on offer.
To feel confident about the future you can craft for yourselves because of that education.
To be confident of the future contribution you can make also to your community, your country and the wider world.
Today, we are able deploy the new powers available to us in this modern world - the power of new ideas, the power of new technologies, and the unprecedented power of an information revolution now capable of disseminating innovation around the world in an instant.
To re-shape things that are old.
And, in the great spirit of innovation that characterises our age, to shape things that are entirely new.
As the students of today and as the leaders of tomorrow, you are pioneers in one of the most challenging, innovating and exciting periods in history.
The rewards are great.
But so too are the responsibilities that will fall on your shoulders.
To rise to the challenge of this first truly global age.
The ties between our two nations, Singapore and Australia, go back many years.
We have a shared past, forged through the enduring legacy of war.
A time etched in both our nations' memory and so poignantly remembered at Kranji War Cemetery, which I visited last year.
Singapore and Australia share a long-standing desire for peace and economic development.
A desire that we can achieve through dialogue, through cooperation and through education.
Education has the power to transform the lives of individuals , of communities, of cities and of nations.
This great university counts among its alumni one of Asia's preeminent statesmen, Minister Mentor Lee Kuan Yew.
And each year welcomes over 30,000 students from all over the world to its campuses.
It is a University of remarkable quality, with outstanding international links and a great reputation for cooperation and entrepreneurial drive.
We see this quality in your international student exchange programs, which you extend to eight Australian universities.
And the joint degree programs that you deliver with some of the world's top institutions, including my alma mater, the Australian National University.
Your hosting of the Association of Pacific Rim Universities also demonstrates your very real commitment to cooperative research and teaching, to the benefit of all.
My message to you today is simple: Education will be the driving force of the 21st Century.
The most educated, the most skilled, the best trained societies will also be the strongest societies in the 21st century.
They will also be the most resilient economies in the 21st century.
Education that is illuminating, that is innovative, that is outward looking, that draws on the widest canon of ideas and that brings together young people across the continents and across the disciplines - the education we will need to negotiate the complex century that lies ahead.
The power of education has long been understood.
As the English essayist and poet Joseph Addison said:
"Education is a companion which no misfortune can depress, no crime can destroy, no enemy can alienate, no despotism can enslave.
At home, a friend; abroad, an introduction; in solitude, a solace; and in society, an ornament. ......
....It gives at once grace and government to genius."
Education is the engine room of ideas, of economies and of nations.
Education builds the fabric of societies.
Education revolutionises opportunity.
Education promotes understanding as its intrinsic disciplines require us to look beyond the narrow shores of prejudice, to look widely at the world through the eyes of others.
Education therefore fosters tolerance.
And through tolerance, harmony.
Education also satisfies our basic aspiration to bequeath a better world to those who follow.
Better equity.
Better opportunity.
Better productivity.
Higher levels of workforce participation.
Better health.
Better environmental sustainability.
Education is therefore the single most important ingredient for success in the economies of the 21st century - and here I use the term success in its narrowest and broadest measures - economic and social; personal and national.
The OECD has previously reported that tripling the time spent in school in developing countries was accompanied by a tripling of gross domestic product in those countries.[1]
Access to secondary and tertiary education is the key to building a knowledge-based workforce.
And the benefits of higher education are multiplied when students attend overseas schools and universities.
According to the OECD, the number of students studying overseas doubled over 20 years to the early part of this decade.[2]
These students not only gain and transfer knowledge but also create the people-to-people links that help investment, cultural understanding and official diplomacy.
As Singapore's own Prime Minister Lee said recently, education 'bridges the gaps between dissimilar cultures and promotes understanding among people'.
Australia is working to promote regional cooperation in education in practical ways.
Within APEC, we promote cooperation on governance of education systems.
We also promote open and transparent regulatory systems, so that students and education providers can move freely between member economies.
Australia is also a strong supporter of the efforts within the East Asia Summit (EAS) to increase education cooperation.
We have funded research on regional competitiveness and community building.
We have also offered to work with the ASEAN Secretariat to convene two EAS Education Workshops in 2010.
Workshops that we hope will help member countries to identify further areas for education cooperation.
One of the most exciting EAS education initiatives, which the Australian Government supports, is the proposal to revive the ancient Nalanda University in India.
This is a University with a 700 year history as a centre of cultural exchange across Asia.
The initiative will help promote tolerance, understanding, and harmony and contribute to building a community of learning across the Asia-Pacific.
Initiatives such as this, and efforts to promote and share in education more generally, demonstrate that we have far more to gain by standing together, than standing alone.
The Australian Government recognises the power of education.
In Australia, we are promoting what we describe as an Education Revolution.
A radical new quantitative and qualitative investment in the Australian education system - from early childhood education, through school education, vocational training, universities and post-graduate research.
Our mission is clear - to build over time the best educated, the best trained, the best skilled workforce in the world.
And also, through our comprehensive Asian language education program in our schools - under which aroun three-quarters of a million students in our schools are studying the principal languages of Asia - to help make the coming generation create the most Asia literate country in the collective west; a country and a people for whom the languages and cultures of Asia are no longer foreign but familiar.
Australia also recognises that getting access to education, especially higher education, is an acute challenge in developing countries.
A lack of educational opportunity is not without precedent.
It was especially evident after World War Two.
The fear then was that the lack of opportunity would lead to sustained poverty and lead in turn towards ideological radicalism.
So in the midst of those troubled times, many nations  -  developed and developing  -  came together to create the Colombo Plan.
The Colombo Plan - in which Australia was proud to be active from the start - has become a byword for successful cooperation, personal opportunity and economic development.
The scheme ran in its full form for over 30 years and benefited more than 40,000 young people from across Asia.
The Colombo Plan boasts a number of prominent current Asian leaders.
Here in Singapore we are proud to count among Australia's Colombo Plan alumni three Cabinet-level Ministers - Minister for National Development, Mah Bow Tan; Minister for Health, Khaw Boon Wan; and my good friend Minister for Transport, Raymond Lim.
I am delighted that another distinguished Australian Colombo Plan alumnus is with us here today.
Currently Chairman of Keppel Corporation, Dr Lee Boon Yang has a list of past ministerial appointments too long for me to mention.
We can't claim credit for all his achievements... but I note his alma mater is the University of Queensland from my home state.
We see Dr Lee as not only an honorary Australian but equally an honorary Queenslander.
Other Australian alumni in the region include Dr Boediono, Indonesia's recently-elected Vice President.
Also, Dato' Mustapa Mohamed, the Trade Minister of Malaysia.
And Dr Sirikorn Maneerin, a former deputy education minister and first president of Thailand's Knowledge Park is also an Australian Colombo scholar.
Clearly, the Colombo Plan was an enormous success.
But the tradition of educational cooperation between Australia and Singapore has continued beyond the Colombo Plan.
Indeed, more than 100,000 Singaporeans have studied in Australia over the years and many have gone on to make substantial contributions to Singapore, Australia and the broader Asian region.
These alumni include people like former Deputy Prime Minister and Defence Minister Tony Tan Keng Yam, who undertook his doctorate in Australia.
We also like to count Minister Mentor Lee Kuan Yew, as one of our honorary alumni.
The Australian National University - my alma mater - awarded him the honorary degree of Doctor of Laws for his service to the development of Singapore, his international statesmanship, and his friendship with Australia.
In short, education has long been the lifeblood of the Australia-Singapore relationship and more broadly across the region.
With alumni of this calibre, and the high priority that Australia places on education at home and abroad as well as our comprehensive engagement across the Asia-Pacific region, it should not be surprising that the Australian Government sees great benefit in building further the education bonds between our country and our region.
Today I am announcing the creation of a new Australian international scholarship program.
This program will be entitled "The Australia Awards".
Awards inspired by the original Colombo Plan.
Awards that will become for Australia the Colombo Plan of the 21st Century.
Awards which will over time extend the long-standing Australian scholarship program that has shared the benefits of our world-class education sector with many.
Our existing scholarship program is already extensive.
But we intend to make it even better.
And we intend to bring these many programs under one single roof - bringing together as many as 5000 Australia Awards offered each year to students abroad to study in Australia and for Australians also to study abroad.
The first phase of this new program will be launched in 2010, under the name the "Australia Asia Awards" - or the "Triple A" awards.
These awards will also include, in the initial four years, scholarships for high-achieving individuals across Asia to study in Australia, and for Australians to study in Asia from 2010.
Furthermore, a highly prestigious alumni program will be developed to deepen the experience for the AAA awardees to help maintain their connection to Australia over the long term.
The Government has committed $8 million for the first phase of the Australia Asia Awards that will be devoted to supporting the new Australia Awards brand, alumni and support services.
Some of these AAA awards will be earmarked as 'Achievement Awards'.
So individuals who have already demonstrated their potential to be leaders within their own countries are fostered and given every opportunity to fulfil their potential.
These scholarships will be open to applicants from all over Asia, including Singapore.
And I encourage everyone here today to think about applying - and become our first AAA scholars from 2010.
A second group of awards will be called 'Development Awards' for high-performing students from developing countries.
$10 million will be devoted to providing up to 170 additional scholarships for students from developing countries in Asia.
Asia is the first stage for these new Australia Awards.
In coming years, the program will expand to provide scholarships for the Pacific, Africa, the Middle East, the Americas and Europe.
To ensure a high quality global program, the Australian Government will appoint a highly experienced Board to help oversee the program.
Board members will be drawn from the government, corporate and academic sectors, and from home and abroad (including some of our existing illustrious Australian alumni) to advise the Australian Government on how the Australia Awards program can best achieve its objectives.
These objectives include developing the leadership potential of each participant.
I also intend to ask the Board to explore opportunities for Award winners to work with Australian industries during their stay.
The program will also provide opportunities for young Australians to undertake study and work in our region and to study with students from around the region at home in Australia.
The scholarships will enable Australia to showcase its cutting-edge capabilities in the education sector, which already includes eight of the world's top 100 universities.
They will build on the significant numbers of international students who already benefit from studying in Australia - currently over 500,000.
And they demonstrate Australia's ongoing commitment to building closer and enduring ties with the region, including at the personal level.
I'd like to conclude by reflecting John F. Kennedy's remark, half a century ago that:
"Our progress as a nation can be no swifter than our progress in education."
We can take his idea one step further today: our progress as a regional community and our progress as a global community can be no swifter than our progress in education.
In this rapidly changing world, we can no longer afford to see ourselves as existing in isolation.
In order to progress, we need to understand more about our neighbours.
To do that, we must give something of ourselves.
We must also learn more about the way the world works, about the ways people think, about the way cultures shape the way people think, and about ways to communicate ideas and respectfully deploy the new technologies of our age across the old divides of language and culture.
This is a task that we can all tackle together.
As a regional community that works towards shared goals, for the benefit of all our peoples.
In the 21st Century, the world's centre of strategic and economic gravity will move to the Asia Pacific region.
As the leaders of tomorrow, your responsibility will be great.
Because not only is it important for Asia how we conduct our affairs to guarantee our future peace and prosperity.
It is also important for the world - because the future of the Asian century will now for the first time shape the future of the world.
The Australian Government believes, consistent with our proposal for an Asia Pacific community, that the countries of the region should work together.
To develop, together, an architecture to meet the challenges associated with this shift.
To shape our collective future.
Not simply to respond to events.
Not to allow strategic drift to occur in the hope that regional peace and prosperity are somehow deterministically assured.
History informs us that it is not always the case.
We must constantly shape our future.
Rather than simply allowing the future to shape us.
We must drive forward regional financial and economic integration, nurture a culture of dialogue and collaboration, and build over time a genuine sense - and in time institutional structures - that foster a sense of economic and security community.
Building high level engagement through education will make an important contribution to these objectives.
And through the Australia Asia Awards we will play our part by bringing the next generation of Asian leaders together in whatever fields of political, economic, scientific, academic or professional endeavour they choose to pursue.
The Australia Asia Awards will help nurture this next generation and assist to give full expression to their talents.
I am an optimist about our region's future.
The challenges are vast.
The threats are real.
But the opportunities, too, are great.
And I am confident you, the young people of Singapore, together with the young people of Australia and the region at large, will rise to the challenge of turning this century of the Pacific into a truly pacific century.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
It is indeed an honour to be back in Singapore, and to be at your National University.
A university with its own virtual university - creating a student co-designed, co-built and co-owned campus in the virtual world.
I'm told you can create your own avatar and make your way around the virtual campus.
I'm not sure if you can get a virtual degree - but if it were my university student son, he would be equally keen on the idea of virtual exams, and virtual assignments as well.
It's great to be here today with so many young people from the university and the schools.
You are the future of this extraordinary island Republic.
And I know that you share many aspirations with the young people of Australia.
To feel confident about the quality of the educational opportunities on offer.
To feel confident about the future you can craft for yourselves because of that education.
To be confident of the future contribution you can make also to your community, your country and the wider world.
Today, we are able deploy the new powers available to us in this modern world - the power of new ideas, the power of new technologies, and the unprecedented power of an information revolution now capable of disseminating innovation around the world in an instant.
To re-shape things that are old.
And, in the great spirit of innovation that characterises our age, to shape things that are entirely new.
As the students of today and as the leaders of tomorrow, you are pioneers in one of the most challenging, innovating and exciting periods in history.
The rewards are great.
But so too are the responsibilities that will fall on your shoulders.
To rise to the challenge of this first truly global age.
The ties between our two nations, Singapore and Australia, go back many years.
We have a shared past, forged through the enduring legacy of war.
A time etched in both our nations' memory and so poignantly remembered at Kranji War Cemetery, which I visited last year.
Singapore and Australia share a long-standing desire for peace and economic development.
A desire that we can achieve through dialogue, through cooperation and through education.
Education has the power to transform the lives of individuals , of communities, of cities and of nations.
This great university counts among its alumni one of Asia's preeminent statesmen, Minister Mentor Lee Kuan Yew.
And each year welcomes over 30,000 students from all over the world to its campuses.
It is a University of remarkable quality, with outstanding international links and a great reputation for cooperation and entrepreneurial drive.
We see this quality in your international student exchange programs, which you extend to eight Australian universities.
And the joint degree programs that you deliver with some of the world's top institutions, including my alma mater, the Australian National University.
Your hosting of the Association of Pacific Rim Universities also demonstrates your very real commitment to cooperative research and teaching, to the benefit of all.
My message to you today is simple: Education will be the driving force of the 21st Century.
The most educated, the most skilled, the best trained societies will also be the strongest societies in the 21st century.
They will also be the most resilient economies in the 21st century.
Education that is illuminating, that is innovative, that is outward looking, that draws on the widest canon of ideas and that brings together young people across the continents and across the disciplines - the education we will need to negotiate the complex century that lies ahead.
The power of education has long been understood.
As the English essayist and poet Joseph Addison said:
"Education is a companion which no misfortune can depress, no crime can destroy, no enemy can alienate, no despotism can enslave. 
At home, a friend; abroad, an introduction; in solitude, a solace; and in society, an ornament. ......
....It gives at once grace and government to genius." 
Education is the engine room of ideas, of economies and of nations.
Education builds the fabric of societies.
Education revolutionises opportunity.
Education promotes understanding as its intrinsic disciplines require us to look beyond the narrow shores of prejudice, to look widely at the world through the eyes of others.
Education therefore fosters tolerance.
And through tolerance, harmony.
Education also satisfies our basic aspiration to bequeath a better world to those who follow.
Better equity.
Better opportunity.
Better productivity.
Higher levels of workforce participation.
Better health.
Better environmental sustainability.
Education is therefore the single most important ingredient for success in the economies of the 21st century - and here I use the term success in its narrowest and broadest measures - economic and social; personal and national.
The OECD has previously reported that tripling the time spent in school in developing countries was accompanied by a tripling of gross domestic product in those countries.
Access to secondary and tertiary education is the key to building a knowledge-based workforce.
And the benefits of higher education are multiplied when students attend overseas schools and universities.
According to the OECD, the number of students studying overseas doubled over 20 years to the early part of this decade.
These students not only gain and transfer knowledge but also create the people-to-people links that help investment, cultural understanding and official diplomacy.
As Singapore's own Prime Minister Lee said recently, education 'bridges the gaps between dissimilar cultures and promotes understanding among people'.
Australia is working to promote regional cooperation in education in practical ways.
Within APEC, we promote cooperation on governance of education systems.
We also promote open and transparent regulatory systems, so that students and education providers can move freely between member economies.
Australia is also a strong supporter of the efforts within the East Asia Summit (EAS) to increase education cooperation.
We have funded research on regional competitiveness and community building.
We have also offered to work with the ASEAN Secretariat to convene two EAS Education Workshops in 2010.
Workshops that we hope will help member countries to identify further areas for education cooperation.
One of the most exciting EAS education initiatives, which the Australian Government supports, is the proposal to revive the ancient Nalanda University in India.
This is a University with a 700 year history as a centre of cultural exchange across Asia.
The initiative will help promote tolerance, understanding, and harmony and contribute to building a community of learning across the Asia-Pacific.
Initiatives such as this, and efforts to promote and share in education more generally, demonstrate that we have far more to gain by standing together, than standing alone.
The Australian Government recognises the power of education.
In Australia, we are promoting what we describe as an Education Revolution.
A radical new quantitative and qualitative investment in the Australian education system - from early childhood education, through school education, vocational training, universities and post-graduate research.
Our mission is clear - to build over time the best educated, the best trained, the best skilled workforce in the world.
And also, through our comprehensive Asian language education program in our schools - under which aroun three-quarters of a million students in our schools are studying the principal languages of Asia - to help make the coming generation create the most Asia literate country in the collective west; a country and a people for whom the languages and cultures of Asia are no longer foreign but familiar.
Australia also recognises that getting access to education, especially higher education, is an acute challenge in developing countries.
A lack of educational opportunity is not without precedent.
It was especially evident after World War Two.
The fear then was that the lack of opportunity would lead to sustained poverty and lead in turn towards ideological radicalism.
So in the midst of those troubled times, many nations  -  developed and developing  -  came together to create the Colombo Plan.
The Colombo Plan - in which Australia was proud to be active from the start - has become a byword for successful cooperation, personal opportunity and economic development.
The scheme ran in its full form for over 30 years and benefited more than 40,000 young people from across Asia.
The Colombo Plan boasts a number of prominent current Asian leaders.
Here in Singapore we are proud to count among Australia's Colombo Plan alumni three Cabinet-level Ministers - Minister for National Development, Mah Bow Tan; Minister for Health, Khaw Boon Wan; and my good friend Minister for Transport, Raymond Lim.
I am delighted that another distinguished Australian Colombo Plan alumnus is with us here today.
Currently Chairman of Keppel Corporation, Dr Lee Boon Yang has a list of past ministerial appointments too long for me to mention.
We can't claim credit for all his achievements... but I note his alma mater is the University of Queensland from my home state.
We see Dr Lee as not only an honorary Australian but equally an honorary Queenslander.
Other Australian alumni in the region include Dr Boediono, Indonesia's recently-elected Vice President.
Also, Dato' Mustapa Mohamed, the Trade Minister of Malaysia.
And Dr Sirikorn Maneerin, a former deputy education minister and first president of Thailand's Knowledge Park is also an Australian Colombo scholar.
Clearly, the Colombo Plan was an enormous success.
But the tradition of educational cooperation between Australia and Singapore has continued beyond the Colombo Plan.
Indeed, more than 100,000 Singaporeans have studied in Australia over the years and many have gone on to make substantial contributions to Singapore, Australia and the broader Asian region.
These alumni include people like former Deputy Prime Minister and Defence Minister Tony Tan Keng Yam, who undertook his doctorate in Australia.
We also like to count Minister Mentor Lee Kuan Yew, as one of our honorary alumni.
The Australian National University - my alma mater - awarded him the honorary degree of Doctor of Laws for his service to the development of Singapore, his international statesmanship, and his friendship with Australia.
In short, education has long been the lifeblood of the Australia-Singapore relationship and more broadly across the region.
With alumni of this calibre, and the high priority that Australia places on education at home and abroad as well as our comprehensive engagement across the Asia-Pacific region, it should not be surprising that the Australian Government sees great benefit in building further the education bonds between our country and our region.
Today I am announcing the creation of a new Australian international scholarship program.
This program will be entitled "The Australia Awards".
Awards inspired by the original Colombo Plan.
Awards that will become for Australia the Colombo Plan of the 21st Century.
Awards which will over time extend the long-standing Australian scholarship program that has shared the benefits of our world-class education sector with many.
Our existing scholarship program is already extensive.
But we intend to make it even better.
And we intend to bring these many programs under one single roof - bringing together as many as 5000 Australia Awards offered each year to students abroad to study in Australia and for Australians also to study abroad.
The first phase of this new program will be launched in 2010, under the name the "Australia Asia Awards" - or the "Triple A" awards.
These awards will also include, in the initial four years, scholarships for high-achieving individuals across Asia to study in Australia, and for Australians to study in Asia from 2010.
Furthermore, a highly prestigious alumni program will be developed to deepen the experience for the AAA awardees to help maintain their connection to Australia over the long term.
The Government has committed $8 million for the first phase of the Australia Asia Awards that will be devoted to supporting the new Australia Awards brand, alumni and support services.
Some of these AAA awards will be earmarked as 'Achievement Awards'.
So individuals who have already demonstrated their potential to be leaders within their own countries are fostered and given every opportunity to fulfil their potential.
These scholarships will be open to applicants from all over Asia, including Singapore.
And I encourage everyone here today to think about applying - and become our first AAA scholars from 2010.
A second group of awards will be called 'Development Awards' for high-performing students from developing countries.
$10 million will be devoted to providing up to 170 additional scholarships for students from developing countries in Asia.
Asia is the first stage for these new Australia Awards.
In coming years, the program will expand to provide scholarships for the Pacific, Africa, the Middle East, the Americas and Europe.
To ensure a high quality global program, the Australian Government will appoint a highly experienced Board to help oversee the program.
Board members will be drawn from the government, corporate and academic sectors, and from home and abroad (including some of our existing illustrious Australian alumni) to advise the Australian Government on how the Australia Awards program can best achieve its objectives.
These objectives include developing the leadership potential of each participant.
I also intend to ask the Board to explore opportunities for Award winners to work with Australian industries during their stay.
The program will also provide opportunities for young Australians to undertake study and work in our region and to study with students from around the region at home in Australia.
The scholarships will enable Australia to showcase its cutting-edge capabilities in the education sector, which already includes eight of the world's top 100 universities.
They will build on the significant numbers of international students who already benefit from studying in Australia - currently over 500,000.
And they demonstrate Australia's ongoing commitment to building closer and enduring ties with the region, including at the personal level.
I'd like to conclude by reflecting John F. Kennedy's remark, half a century ago that:
"Our progress as a nation can be no swifter than our progress in education."
We can take his idea one step further today: our progress as a regional community and our progress as a global community can be no swifter than our progress in education.
In this rapidly changing world, we can no longer afford to see ourselves as existing in isolation.
In order to progress, we need to understand more about our neighbours.
To do that, we must give something of ourselves.
We must also learn more about the way the world works, about the ways people think, about the way cultures shape the way people think, and about ways to communicate ideas and respectfully deploy the new technologies of our age across the old divides of language and culture.
This is a task that we can all tackle together.
As a regional community that works towards shared goals, for the benefit of all our peoples.
In the 21st Century, the world's centre of strategic and economic gravity will move to the Asia Pacific region.
As the leaders of tomorrow, your responsibility will be great.
Because not only is it important for Asia how we conduct our affairs to guarantee our future peace and prosperity.
It is also important for the world - because the future of the Asian century will now for the first time shape the future of the world.
The Australian Government believes, consistent with our proposal for an Asia Pacific community, that the countries of the region should work together.
To develop, together, an architecture to meet the challenges associated with this shift.
To shape our collective future.
Not simply to respond to events.
Not to allow strategic drift to occur in the hope that regional peace and prosperity are somehow deterministically assured.
History informs us that it is not always the case.
We must constantly shape our future.
Rather than simply allowing the future to shape us.
We must drive forward regional financial and economic integration, nurture a culture of dialogue and collaboration, and build over time a genuine sense - and in time institutional structures - that foster a sense of economic and security community.
Building high level engagement through education will make an important contribution to these objectives.
And through the Australia Asia Awards we will play our part by bringing the next generation of Asian leaders together in whatever fields of political, economic, scientific, academic or professional endeavour they choose to pursue.
The Australia Asia Awards will help nurture this next generation and assist to give full expression to their talents.
I am an optimist about our region's future.
The challenges are vast.
The threats are real.
But the opportunities, too, are great.
And I am confident you, the young people of Singapore, together with the young people of Australia and the region at large, will rise to the challenge of turning this century of the Pacific into a truly pacific century.


Thank you very much, and thank you for that kind introduction, and it's great to be back here in Singapore, and can I congratulate each of you as representatives of the business communities of this great and dynamic region for attending this conference.
This has been a very difficult year for business around the world. You've had to wrestle with the challenges of the global financial crisis, which has become has become an economic crisis, which has become an employment crisis in many countries, and it has sapped a lot of confidence in the global economy. But the fact that you as leaders of business around the world and around our region, which represents 56 percent of the global economy is a testament to your strong resolve, because together governments and business have made a difference in the last 12 months.
One of the global institutions which has helped makes a difference is the G20, and together with my colleague from Mexico and elsewhere around the region and the world, and the fact that we have nine member states of APEC who are members of the G20 underlines the significance of that institution in underpinning the seeds for economic recovery.
In fact, if you look at the fact that we are now in a part of the economy which sees growth in the world in 2009, for the first time since 1951 being negative, the global economy contracting, this has placed very large challenges indeed on the shoulders of global economic governance and on regional institutional cooperation. This is where governments have a role to play.
Secondly, when we are asked, as Tommy has, to address the question of the adequacy of regional institutions, let us assess what is going right before we assess then how we can do it better in the future. Take this great institution, APEC, which this year celebrates its 20th anniversary. Prime Minister Hawke of Australia, was an initiator of this great institution in 1989, and when you looked at the challenges back then about drawing down the boundaries of protectionism within this great region, people looked then very sceptically about what we could achieve.
But the figures now demonstrate success. Back then the general protection level of nearly 20 percent centre across this region - now, over that period time, have been brought down closer to 5 (percent). And when you look at the fact that as a region we generate $6.2 trillion of trade, and we have managed to take out such a large amount of protectionism, in terms of the economic activity across borders, this is a significant achievement. And moves to liberalise the economy do not happen automatically. They happen as a consequence of governments getting together and deciding to make things work, to make it easier for business to do what business does best.
So on the positive report card, APEC, in my judgement, has been an extraordinary success story.
Secondly, when APEC translated in the 1990s to a summit-level operation, it presented new opportunities as well. Those opportunities where for Heads of Government to gather each year in non-crisis mode across our region, to discuss the wider challenges facing the Asia-Pacific region. Challenges of security, challenges of broader global collaboration, including most recently, challenges concerning climate change.
This should not be underestimated as an additional value which we've obtained from APEC. The ability for leaders from the United States, from China, from Japan, and from elsewhere in the region, from Mexico, from Australia, and in Southeast Asia, to gather each year to spend time with each other on the common challenges of our region, beyond the specific agenda of trade liberalisation. That has been the second great achievement of APEC. The task we are left with to answer here, however, is how can we take these institutions of existing regional governance and improve them in the future? And that is why Australia has initiated a debate concerning an Asia-Pacific community by 2020.
Let me outline briefly the proposition and the case. Right now, we have a vast array of institutions. Each of them performing a critical and valuable role. We have APEC, I've just referred to. We have the emergence, also, of the East Asia Summit, which brings together the dynamic economies of South-East Asia and ASEAN, with the three powerhouses of North East Asia, China, Korea, as well as Japan. As well as, now, India, Australia and New Zealand. This is a good gathering. It is achieving good momentum. We also have, in our region, ASEAN itself, the oldest success story in terms of regional institutionalism.
And when people reflect on why institutions matter, think about this - when ASEAN was created in 1967, the thought of it forty years later, having within it the traditional warring parties of Communist IndoChina and non-Communist Southeast-Asia was inconceivable. What it's achieved in forty years is actually to bring together a sense of common, regional community, soft security community, as well as enhanced economic cooperation across all these countries of Southeast Asia. It is an outstanding success story. For the region at large, how do we take the success of ASEAN and generalise it for the future challenges of the Asia-Pacific region at large?
How do we avoid the re-emergence of fundamental strategic rifts in our region in the future, when we're still required to deal with some of the deep, underlying challenges concerning territorial claims. Unresolved territorial claims in the Korean Peninsula and the Taiwan Straits, in the South China Sea and elsewhere. How do you avoid any future conflict which would underpin the trajectory of growth that we've had so successfully in this region now for many decades? And how do we enhance further our cooperation to create over time a single market in these vast economies which we represent here?
Our proposal for an Asia-Pacific Community seeks to do this - it seeks to bring together in a single institution over time the economies and countries of our region, with an agenda which covers the entire space, not just part of it.
Political cooperation, security cooperation, as well as economic cooperation- as well as many other areas, including climate change. At present, APEC has no political or security agenda explicitly. It is a gathering of economies. The East Asian Summit has its strengths, but it (inaudible) our great friends and partners the United States, from its gatherings so far. And ASEAN of course is legitimately concentrated on Southeast Asia. So our vision for the future is how do we create an institution which draws all these (inaudible) economies, and, most importantly, together with an agenda which covers the political, security, and economic space, to encourage the habits of cooperation, the habits which underpin security cooperation, the habits which underpin a common sense of community in our region.
I conclude by saying this. Often, we assume that somehow peace and security are delivered by some deterministic means. That they are inevitable. That is not the case. Peace and cooperation across our region have been hard fought through the institutions of existing cooperation over recent decades, because the history prior to that is not a happy history at all.
Therefore, we have to encourage through direct institution-building these habits of cooperation to become entrenched and normal in the future. Think of this with Europe. Europe fought disastrous wars from the 17th century to the 18th century to the 19th century, and finally, the cataclysm of two world wars in the 20th century, before finally realising that they had to fashion an institution which would put conflict to one side, and fashion instead the habits of cooperation. And that is the European Union.
I do not advocate a European Union model for the countries of the Asia Pacific region, but I believe we can learn from that example, and learn from the example fashioned within our own neighbourhood through ASEAN itself, an extraordinary successful organisation.
So let us have an ambition to move our region in this direction. We in Australia are entirely relaxed and patient about how long this may take. We have set ourselves the goal of 2020. We have a one and a half track conference convened on our concept of an Asia Pacific community to be held in Sydney next month. And I'm pleased to say that Governments and countries across the region have sent a high level set of delegations to attend that conference. But we will move patiently, and consistently, with the expressions of views from across the region, and they will be many and varied.
But my concluding point is this. It is far better that we seek to shape the future by encouraging, institutionally, the habits of cooperation across the wider region, than simply to take a passive approach and allow the future to shape us.
Thank you for your attention.


Today, the Government of Australia will move the following motion of apology in the Parliament of Australia.
We come together today to deal with an ugly chapter in our nation's history.
And we come together today to offer our nation's apology.
To say to you, the Forgotten Australians, and those who were sent to our shores as children without your consent, that we are sorry.
Sorry - that as children you were taken from your families and placed in institutions where so often you were abused.
Sorry - for the physical suffering, the emotional starvation and the cold absence of love, of tenderness, of care.
Sorry - for the tragedy, the absolute tragedy, of childhoods lost,- childhoods spent instead in austere and authoritarian places, where names were replaced by numbers, spontaneous play by regimented routine, the joy of learning by the repetitive drudgery of menial work.
Sorry - for all these injustices to you, as children, who were placed in our care.
As a nation, we must now reflect on those who did not receive proper care.
We look back with shame that many of you were left cold, hungry and alone and with nowhere to hide and nobody to whom to turn.
We look back with shame that so many of you were left cold, hungry and alone and with nowhere to hide and with nobody, absolutely nobody, to whom to turn.
We look back with shame that many these little ones who were entrusted to institutions and foster homes instead, were abused physically, humiliated cruelly, violated sexually.
And we look back with shame at how those with power were allowed to abuse those who had none.
And how then, as if this was not injury enough, you were left ill-prepared for life outside - left to fend for yourselves; often unable to read or write; to struggle alone with no friends and no family.
For these failures to offer proper care to the powerless, the voiceless and the most vulnerable, we say sorry.
We reflect too today on the families who were ripped apart simply because they had fallen on hard times.
Hard times brought about by illness, by death and by poverty.
Some simply left destitute when fathers damaged by war could no longer cope.
Again, we say sorry for the extended families you never knew.
We acknowledge the particular pain of children shipped to Australia as child migrants - robbed of your families, robbed of your homeland, regarded not as innocent children but regarded instead as a source of child labour.
To those of you who were told you were orphans, brought here without your parents' knowledge or consent, we acknowledge the lies you were told, the lies told to your mothers and fathers, and the pain these lies have caused for a lifetime.
To those of you separated on the dockside from your brothers and sisters; taken alone and unprotected to the most remote parts of a foreign land - we acknowledge today that the laws of our nation failed you.
And for this we are deeply sorry.
We think also today of all the families of these Forgotten Australians and former child migrants who are still grieving, families who were never reunited, families who were never reconciled, families who were lost to one another forever.
We reflect too on the burden that is still carried by our own children, your own children, your grandchildren, your husbands, your wives, your partners and your friends - and we thank them for the faith, the love and the depth of commitment that has helped see you through the valley of tears that was not of your own making.
And we reflect with you as well, in sad remembrance, on those who simply could not cope and who took their own lives in absolute despair.
We recognise the pain you have suffered.
Pain is so very, very personal.
Pain is so profoundly disabling.
So, let us together, as a nation, allow this apology to begin to heal this pain.
Healing the pain felt by so many of the half a million of our fellow Australians who were children in care - children in our care.
And let us also resolve this day that this national apology becomes a turning point in our nation's story.
A turning point for shattered lives.
A turning point for governments at all levels and of every political hue and colour to do all in our power to never let this happen again.
For the protection of children is the sacred duty of us all.
This is the motion that later this day this Government will commend to the Parliament of Australia.
Care leavers from around Australia and abroad;
Representatives of the Care Leavers of Australia Network;
the Child Migrants Trust;
the Alliance for Forgotten Australians;
the Leader of the Opposition;
my ministerial and parliamentary colleagues;
representatives of the state governments of Queensland, New South Wales and Victoria;
Her Excellency the High Commissioner for the United Kingdom;
His Excellency the Ambassador of Ireland;
His Excellency High Commissioner for Malta;
ladies and gentlemen;
friends, one and all;
Our purpose today in this Great Hall of this great Australian Parliament is to begin to put right a very great wrong.
To acknowledge the great wrong that has been done to so many of our children.
And as a nation, to apologise for this great wrong.
And, as a nation, to resolve that such systematic abuse should never happen again.
The truth is this is an ugly story.
And its ugliness must be told without fear or favour if we are to confront fully the demons of our past.
And in so doing, animate, once again, the better angels of our human nature.
I believe we do a disservice to those who have been the victims of abuse if in any way we seek to gloss things over. 
Because the truth is great evil has been done.
And therefore hard things must be said about how this was all possible in this country of the fair go.
Unless we are now transparent about what has been done in our nation's name, our apology can never be complete.
Because let us be clear - these children, both from home and abroad, were placed in care under the auspices of the state, validated by the laws of the land.
It is estimated that more than 500,000 children were placed in care under various arrangements over the course of the last century.
This is no small number.
Let us imagine that more than half of the city of Adelaide was drawn from children who had been placed in institutional or foster care.
This is no small number.
In recent weeks, it has been my privilege to meet some of these children, most of them now middle-aged. 
And some perhaps a little older again.
And I take the intervention from the floor - some younger than that again.
Here is something of their stories as told to me.
Last week I sat down with Garry for a cup of tea at his home here in Canberra.
Garry told me he had five brothers and sisters.
His father was an ex-serviceman who, in Gary's words, drank himself to death.
When Garry was four or five, he remembers being taken to the steps of the local police station with his brothers and sisters and told to wait until his mum returned, who had promised ice creams for all.
She never returned.
As Garry recalls, "I never got my ice-cream".
A fortnight later, he was committed as a ward of the state.
He told me his twin brothers had been fostered to a good family in Wollongong.
But he was taken to an institution and separated from his sisters, who were placed elsewhere.
All this, at the age of four or five.
Alone, absolutely alone, devastatingly alone in the world.
He told me that, at the age of six or seven, he tried to hang himself from the swings because he wanted to be with his brothers.
He was later placed in a rural home for older boys where he remained until the age of 13.
He remembers being picked up from the train station on a freezing night in a big red truck with a row of numbered seats. He was told to sit in seat number 3.
He was given, a number.
As Garry said, "my number was always three, it sticks in your head".
The culture of this home, as Garry described it, was one of institutional violence as boys were made to beat each other, to beat other boys to the ground, in front of their peers.
At 13, he was transferred to an institution where he remembers a kindly cook taking him under her wing.
But it was during this time Garry says, he suffered sexual abuse from other men.
Garry later got into drugs to help escape the psychological torture he suffered through years of what was so-called institutional care.
Garry has led a tough life.
But Garry is a survivor.
He proudly introduced me to his seven beautiful children - all doing well at school and the older ones already planning for their future.
And showed me with pride the carpenter's trade certificate he earned through study in 2005.
When asked by CLAN (a community organisation established to help survivors of institutional abuse, and known to so many of you here today) when asked by CLAN to write down his story Garry said, "what am I going to write down, you can't put tears on paper".
It has also been my privilege to sit down with twins Robyn and Judy last Monday when I was in Bathurst.
They told me too, that their mother left home when they too were barely five years old. They were then placed in a church home.
Judy remembers the day they were first taken to the home and her sister Robyn bolted from the gate and ran away.
They later found her and dragged her back.
Robyn and Judy remember that they kept waiting and waiting for just someone, someone to come and pick them up - but no-one, no-one ever came.
They recall being hit with belt buckles and bamboo.
They said the place they grew up in was utterly, utterly loveless.
They said it always made them feel like second-class citizens.
At the local school, they were described as "Home Girls".
They looked with envy as other children were picked up by their parents after school.
Robyn told me that, 40 years later, "it stays with you, I still dream about it".
But you know something? Both Robyn and Judy too are fighters.
While emotionally scarred by their experience, they too have beautiful children and partners who care for them. But the wounds run deep. They run very deep.
And then there was Gus.
I spoke to Gus on the phone, he is from Queensland.
Brought out to Australia from Ireland, again at the age of four or five, in the 1950s - as a child apparently born out of wedlock, having earlier spent time in a Catholic institution in Ireland.
Gus' story was truly horrific. His was a tale of physical and sexual abuse over more than a decade. In Gus' words, "that did me terrible mental damage".
He finally tracked down his mum, 10 years ago.
She had gone to the United States. But he then discovered she had passed away.
Gus had limited educational opportunities and has been in and out of gaol a number of times during his life. 
Gus, reflecting back across the years, and in the great tradition of Australian understatement, said he had led a 'colourful life'.
Gus too, is a fighter and survivor.
Whether it is Garry or Gus or Robyn or Judy, there is an eerie similarity to so many of the stories. Stories of physical, emotional or sexual abuse.
Stories of the lack of love. Experiences which stay with them to this day.
Each told me that such was the trauma they experienced in institutional care that they suffered such things as bed-wetting for many, many years - while in care.
This, of course, is deeply personal. Deeply, deeply personal.
But each wanted me to share this part of their story too because it underlined the trauma they had gone through.
But trauma with an ugly double-twist because each time this happened, they were publicly humiliated and publicly punished by those supposedly responsible for their care.
In the conversations I was privileged to have with these great Australian survivors, for each of them this apology today was important.
And for countless thousands and tens of thousands besides, this apology is important.
Important because it does not seek to hide that which they experienced.
An apology that acknowledges the very personal pain that has been caused.
An apology which, it is hoped, will bring some healing balm to wounded souls.
And not just to the handful that I have been so honoured to meet.
But to all those whose cases are reflected in the Senate reports over many, many years. And to those also whose stories will remain forever untold.
There are tens of thousands, perhaps hundreds of thousands of these stories, each as important as the other, each with its own hurts, its own humiliations its own traumas - and each united by the experience of a childhood without love, of childhood alone.
For some, this has become a very public journey of healing. For others, it remains intensely private - not even to be discussed with closest family and friends even today.
And such privacy must of course, be respected.
Whatever your journey today, and whether you are here in Parliament House in Canberra with us or watching or listening across the country or across the world, my hope today is to reach out to you all on behalf of this nation, Australia, and to speak what has so often been unspoken.
And to offer you this profound apology.
To apologise for the pain that has been caused.
To apologise for the failure to offer proper care.
To apologise for those who have gone before us and ignored your cries for help.
Because children, it seems, were not to be believed.
Only those in authority, it seems, were the ones to be believed.
To apologise for denying you basic life opportunities; including so often a decent education.
To apologise also, for just how long it has taken for the Australian Government to say sorry - so many Senate reports, nearly a decade of deliberation, and a unanimous recommendation that the Commonwealth apologise.
And finally we do so today.
Today is also a day for all those who have refused to remain silent.
The champions of this day.
Those driven by sheer tenacity.
By an unswerving sense of justice.
Those who kept the flame of hope alight.
People like Margaret Humphreys, people like Harold Haig, people like Leonie Sheedy and Joanna Penglase, people like Bonnie Djuric, and People like Walter Tusyn who campaigned tirelessly for this day as Tasmanian representative of the Alliance for Forgotten Australians, only to pass away on the 30th of last month.
And people like former Senator Andrew Murray, because Andrew Murray's work has simply been extraordinary. 
I rang Andrew recently and asked him about the importance of this apology.
His response was succinct when he wrote in reply:
"the Senate (and others) have carefully examined these matters and rightly and unanimously recommended an official Commonwealth apology. As a result, the states and the main churches, charities and agencies have apologised (although some are better apologies than others...),
Andrew Murray continued "it is time for the Commonwealth to complete the circle."
It is also important today to honour the advocacy groups who have stood by you through thick and thin - advocacy groups such as: Care Leavers of Australia Network (CLAN); groups like The Child Migrants Trust, advocacy groups such as the Alliance for Forgotten Australians - and many, many others.
But beyond these individuals and organisations stand an army of people who have quietly gone about their business over the last decade or more to take this story of sustained institutional and personal abuse from the margins of government deliberation to the very centre of Government consideration.
For all victims of abuse, today, you are all owed a profound debt of gratitude for having stood by them with such solidarity and strength.
So what then is to be done?
The Australian Government has assembled a comprehensive response to recommendations contained in the two Senate reports - "Lost Innocence" and "Forgotten Australians revisited".
This response will be tabled in the Parliament in the coming days.
The overwhelming message I have received and Minister Macklin has been receiving has been the need to be heard, the need to be acknowledged and the need for the nation to apologise.
It is important however, that this not be regarded as a single point in history. Our view is that it would be helpful for the nation, however painful, to properly record your experiences, where you deem that to be appropriate.
This can assist the nation to learn from your experiences.
As a result, the Australian Government is supporting projects with both the National Library and the National Museum which will provide future generations with a solemn reminder of the past.
To ensure not only that your experiences are heard, but also that they will never ever be forgotten.
And in doing so we must always remember the advice of the sages - that a nation that forgets its past is condemned to relive it.
Second, we also know that you are deeply concerned about practical support to help survivors and their families negotiate what can still so often be damaged lives.
For example, I know many of you are concerned about living in aged care facilities as you grow older and the need for access to proper aged care.
The Government will identify care leavers as a special-needs group for aged-case purposes, to ensure that providers are assisted to provide care that is appropriate and responsive, and provide a range of further counselling and support services.
Third, many Forgotten Australians and child migrants continue to need help in tracing their families. That is why we'll be providing a National Find and Connect Service that will provide Australia-wide coordinated family tracing and support services for care leavers to locate personal and family history files and the reunite with members of their families, where that is possible.
The service will provide a national database that will collate and index existing state identified records into a national searchable data base, accessible to state and other care leaver services and also directly to care leavers themselves.
Fourth, to make sure you are well represented, we have provided and continue to provide funding to advocacy groups such as the Child Migrant Trust, the Alliance for Forgotten Australians and Care Leavers of Australia Network, as these organisations continue to work hard to put your concerns front and centre.
Finally, governments must continue to commit to the systematic auditing, inspection and quality assurance of the child protection services they administer today.
Some 28,000 - 30,000 children are currently in the care of State and Territory Governments around Australia. Governments must put in place every protection possible to reduce the risk of mistreatment in the future.
And, as Andrew Murray reminded me recently,"if you hurt a child, a harmed adult will often result...aggregate those adults who were harmed in care and the social, the economic, the personal cost is huge".
In Andrew's words, we must do everything possible to break the cycle.
I recognise this is a difficult, complex and sensitive area of policy. But the nation must continue to lift its game in doing whatever practicably can be done to provide for the proper protection of little ones, of children.
Let us, therefore today in this Great Hall of this great Australian Parliament, seize this day and see this national apology to our Forgotten Australians and our Child Migrants as a turning point for the future.
For child migrants, for many of you, your mothers and fathers were alive and were made to relinquish their right to be your parents and to watch you grow into adulthood.
Some of you have said you would like to place the apology on the graves of your mothers and fathers back in England and on their graves here in this country as well. Today we dedicate this apology to them as well.
For the Australian-born care leavers, or 'Homies' or 'State Wards' or the 'Foster kids', the Senate named you the 'Forgotten Australians'.
Today, and from this day forward, it is my hope that you will be called the 'Remembered Australians'.
However, whatever I might say today, the truth is, I cannot give you back your childhood. I cannot rewind the clock on your suffering. Nor can I erase the past.
But what I can do with you is celebrate the spirit that has lived within you over the decades. A spirit that has stubbornly refused to be beaten.
A spirit that has turned you into the survivors that you are. The spirit that has enabled you to serve your country in times of war, even if you had been deserted by your country.
The spirit that enabled you to bring up families, despite the broken families from which you came. The spirit that enabled you to work and to make your own contribution to this, our land Australia.
And the spirit that caused you to hold fast that one day you would be heard, one day you would be believed, one day you would be acknowledged.
And that, one day, Australia's sense of a fair-go would finally prevail. That our fair go would be extended to you, and that the nation would offer you the public apology that you deserve.
My message to you today is that that day has finally come.
Let me also say this.
You were in no way to blame for what happened to you because it was the nation who failed you.
The institutions the nation created for your care, failed you.
To all of you here today in this Great Hall. To all of you watching around the nation.
Today is your day. Today is your special day. Today is your achievement.
This morning, I spoke to a 98 year old lady in my electorate in Brisbane.
Her name is Vera. If Vera is watching, 'hi Vera'.
I'm sorry that Vera can't be with us in Canberra today.
She said that the pain that she suffered having spent five years in a Queensland orphanage was pain suffered a lifetime ago.
But her hope that today, as a 98-year-old lady is that finally this day could herald a closing of the book on the past. 
Today is for people just like Vera.
And today let us now go forward together, go forward with confidence, go forward with confidence into the future - as equal, as valued and as precious members of this one great family that we call Australia.


To Gaile and to Juliette, to Adam and to James, to friends and family of Chris O'Brien, and to you, friends of Chris O'Brien one and all.
I've just come from Canberra tonight and we've been engaged in the bear pit of Australian parliamentary democracy otherwise known as the House of Representaitves.
Just last night I was on a video conference, a link at midnight with the Danish Prime Minister and the Secretary-General of the United Nations and others about the future of climate change.
The day before that I'd just come back from Singapore, and we had a meeting of APEC with President Obama and President Hu Jintao, again on climate change and on the economic recovery.
Just before that, in India, looking at the challenges of students being safe in Australia, and prior to that I'd just come from Afghanistan and our troops in the field.
None of these challenges, however, compare with obtaining a contract approval from the New South Wales health authority to get the Chris O'Brien Centre going.
But I bring hope.
I bring genuine hope, because today I had the great privilege of spending the morning with Nathan Rees, the Premier, and good on him for having a whack and a go at recent events here in New South Wales. Good on him. I've said to others, the bloke deserves to have a go, to be given a go.
I also used the opportunity of mentioning a certain matter, a matter dear to all your hearts, and the undertaking I have from the Premier is that by the time he and I roll the bulldozers in mid-December it will be done.
Of course, that was based on two profound human fears; one temporal, one spiritual.
The temporal fear of this - the thought of me behind a bulldozer, given that I am singly unqualified to do anything mechanical or practical.
But the greater fear was this - you may recall that when I gave the undertaking to drive that bulldozer by year's end to make sure this Chris O'Brien Centre was begun, I did so at St Mary's Cathedral in the presence of Cardinal Pell. The thought, therefore, of even a further addition to eternal damnation for not honouring that undertaking given in St Mary's, otherwise known in the Australian Labor Party as 'headquarters' - Father Kevin, stop laughing so loudly - it would be frankly, too much for my conscience or my eternal soul to bear.
Of course, as you know, Chris O'Brien and I had many things in common; we were both rugby union stars.
Those of you who knew Chris O'Brien would say that, like myself, his talent somewhat underperformed in relation to his enthusiasm. Speaking for myself, I went to a Marist school in Brisbane, I was categorised as being the ideal star performer for the under 14 Es. It was a big Catholic school - there was an F team, and I always lived in fear of that F team, for one day I could also be relegated, because they seriously were F Troop on the field. We, by contrast, were stallions of the ball. Well, sort of.
The other thing that Chris O'Brien and I had in common was, of course, our significant medical careers.
Chris had achieved some success as a senior surgeon at RPA. I had become the deputy chief wardsman at Canterbury Hospital when I was heading off towards university, so he and I were able to speak the same language. Well, sort of, and I always gave a more basic view.
I do remember in our discussion about integrated cancer care that it only took me an hour or an hour and a half or so to understand what the hell he was on about, and then finally, in the great tradition of effective politicians, the penny dropped with an audible clang and then I understood what he was about.
Tonight it is a truly great occasion to honour a truly great man. Tonight we gather in this great Gothic hall. As Gaile reminded me as we came in this was the hall in which they were married. This is an extraordinary part of Sydney. It's an extraordinary part of this union.
But it also an extraordinary venue to hear afresh the words of the immortal bard, Bill Shakespeare, and to hear again tonight the extraordinary oration of St Crispin's day. Those of you who knew Chris O'Brien well, knew that he was a huge, huge fan of Shakespeare, and I think he would have been honoured to have had the oration from St Crispin's day in Henry V read here this evening, because so much of that oration was about him, about how you in a field of human battle actually go about making a difference.
All of us have to deal with human enemies.
All of us have to deal with human adversaries.
All of us have to deal with very human challenges. Some of them, from time to time, as they were in St Crispin's day, existential challenges, as they proved to be in the life of Chris, existential challenges as well.
But the spirit of St Crispin's Day as reflected in the oration from Henry V was about how the human spirit prevails when the odds are so large, and so huge and potentially so overpowering - and that was Chris O'Brien writ large, five centuries after the Bard.
So what I'd like to do tonight is reflect briefly on this Chris O'Brien; this man of St Crispin's Day; the man prepared to step into breach, once more into the breach, and what he'd done in his life and what he now calls us to do.
If he were here with us tonight, and I sense, in my own small-t theological way, he is, I think he would have some things to say.
But let me talk about him first, and his passion which you've seen on the screen now tonight, about how you make a difference in people's lives when they're confronted with the extraordinarily visceral news that you are with cancer. And in him you have this extraordinary combination of human talents - a person who is gifted and trained in the greatest of medical and scientific traditions on the one hand, and on the other, a person of human heart and compassion and succour and comfort.
Rarely is this admixture of human talents alive in a single human being - in Chris O'Brien they were. He was not perfect; nobody is. But in bringing those great aspects and impulses of his humanity to bear in his professional choice, he was, in my estimation, a human saint.
So how did he translate that into reality? What he did was to say I, as a physician, will make a difference in as many lives as possible; I'll perform the miracles of surgery which I can perform; I'll perform the counselling which is necessarily associated with that surgery; and I'll bring people through in the best way that I can.
And for all of you in the room this evening who are trained in the medical sciences, I salute you. Your talents are great, your studies formidable, and your excellence is beyond comparison compared with those of us who occupy lesser professions.
But Chris then goes the extra mile. Some time ago he discovers that these talents he deploys one after one in the field can actually be taken to a different level. What is this concept of integrated cancer care, about which we've spoken this evening? How do you actually take the proper, shall we say, integrated healing of the person? How do we actually integrate the diagnostics, with the therapeutics, with the palliatives? How do actually bring all dimensions of, let's call it, the human healing experience and the scientific disciplines associated with it, and the compassion which is necessary to make it possible, how do you bring that together into institutional form and being?
And so was born the concept of integrated cancer care.
And his great talent was the great patience in explaining that to the likes of me when I was merely the leader of Her Majesty's occasionally loyal Opposition.
And so what is the product of this man stepping into the breach, making his difference on his St Crispin's Day?
The Budget this year in May, following three months after I saw him in Canberra, this was May of 2008, just on the very day of the Apology to Aboriginal Australians, we began a process of unfolding what we would do with cancer care, and so we did - $1.3 billion worth of investment in integrated cancer care across the country.
Once such centre will bear his name - the Chris O'Brien Centre. There will be another in Melbourne. But critically across the whole vast continent that is Australia, it'll be also reflected in a half-billion dollars worth of investment in cancer care centres across the country, in rural and regional areas as well. And this friends is just the beginning, because we are dealing with the nation's largest killer.
So that's what Chris O'Brien, in his determination to make a difference, did. Directly, with people in the RPA, in his consulting rooms and in the theatre, but more broadly with the likes of yours truly and trying to make a difference to the country at large.
Now, I think there's a second message from the spirit of Chris O'Brien this evening, and I think he'd also be saying to us this, because what I have said just now he probably would not say at all, because he would regard that as immodest. I think what he would say to us all in our own respective spheres is how too can you rise to your own St Cripin's Day? How can you also be the one that steps into the breach once more? How can you make a difference where you are, in whatever field you are active and where your talents are deployed?
Whether it's in the field of commerce; the field of politics; whether it's the field of community service; whether it's the field of medicine or the other caring professions; whether it's in the sciences; whether it's in the arts or across all disciplines, how can you make a difference? Because his great message to all of us is, you can live a journeyman's life or you can step outside that and make a vast difference with the talents with which you've been divinely appointed.
And that, I think, in his own quiet and effective way, would be his message to us this evening, because I believe in Chris O'Brien you have the combination of two great spirits of history. You have Henry V, once more into the breach, a great and stirring command to human courage, to go beyond that which is physically possible, or seen to be even physically necessary.
That is one strand, but it's animated by something else, and that's the spirit of St Francis. The spirit of St Francis, very simply, is that in giving, you receive.
I was sharing this thought with the Governor before I came up to speak. I said, 'Governor, the happiest people I ever meet in life are those who give the most, and the most miserable are those who give the least.' It is an eternal principle of life in whichever civilisation or culture or community in which you grow up. And I think, therefore, in Chris O'Brien we see this great swirling mixture of St Francis and his healing balm, and Henry V, with his wielding sword, and that's the Chris O'Brien we know and love.
I asked Gaile this evening what she would have me say about this great man, but importantly for her, a dear, dear husband and life partner, and she said, reflect a bit on your own experience of this guy.
We met at a hotel in Sydney called the Radisson. He came because I had heard he was interested in cancer, and at about that time my mother had recently died of cancer. Most of our stories, at the end of the day, are very personal.
As we sat and talked about anything from literature to history to a bit of medical science where I gave him the benefit of my knowledge - well, I was the deputy chief wardsman at Canterbury, and I'd seen it from the ground up - he explained to me with great patience what his concept was about.
He was an extraordinarily good conversationalist. He had an extraordinary capacity to engage you as a person, and to be interested, genuinely, in the ideas of the person whom he was engaging. He said to me, 'I have a brain tumour. You have just become the leader of the Australian Labor Party. I think I've got it tough?', he said. 'You've got it much worse, mate.' And that was Chris to a T.
And for now many, many conversations since then, including in Canberra; including here in Sydney; including at the Governor's residence; including at their home not long before he died; many conversations on the phone; many text messages between us, often in Question Time, where occasionally I was distracted more by his messages than by questions from those opposite - they also made more sense, but that's a different and more partisan story for a different occasion, and I said to Gaile I would not be partisan, and I won't be.
But here was a guy who actually knew how to engage any person, man or woman, high or low as they may be defined in this society's order, as a fellow human being, as a fellow traveller seeking to make our difference in the world in which we survive.
We spoke a lot. We laughed a lot. And I cried a lot when he died.
So to Gaile, and to Juliette and to Adam and to James, what we experience in this great hall at this great university tonight is one small part of what you have felt and known throughout your lives - that we are all privileged to have shared the life of this truly great Australian, Chris O'Brien.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
I thank the Institute of Public Administration for inviting me to deliver the 50th Sir Robert Garran Oration.
The life and work of the first Commonwealth public servant is one of the most remarkable stories in the history of the Australian Public Service.
And profoundly relevant to my subject - the reform of Australian government administration in a time of changing public expectations, changing technology and changing demands.
I am pleased to address this topic at a national conference of the Institute of Public Administration.
For years, the Institute has been a tireless advocate for professional excellence and public sector reform.
I would also like to acknowledge the many state public servants here today - especially those from Queensland.
Although I will focus my remarks on the Australian Public Service, your work in Queensland and other states in partnership with the Commonwealth is a vital part of our COAG reform agenda.
But before I engage in a more detailed discussion of our reform challenges, let me say this.
The Australian public is on the whole well served by honest, capable and highly committed public servants in our government departments and agencies.
You are doing nation-building work, you are doing it well, and I thank you for it.
In September, I announced that the Government would undertake a process of reform of Australian government administration.
I asked the Secretary of the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet, Terry Moran, to establish an Advisory Group to develop a blueprint that would position our public service to meet the immense challenges of the 21st century.
The Advisory Group will deliver its blueprint early next year.
But ahead of the release of that document I want to talk today about why the Australian Government is undertaking this process of review and reform of the APS.
And I will discuss the main findings of an important report released today that measures the performance of the APS against eight of the best public services in the world.
We are not undertaking this reform process because the APS is serving the government poorly.
On the contrary, many parts of the APS are distinguished by excellence in policy advice and program and service delivery.
Nevertheless, the APS also has some gaps that will constrain its capacity to help the Government meet some of the nation's most difficult challenges in the years ahead.
In particular, the APS needs to do more to ensure that it provides the highest-quality service delivery to Australians.
That it delivers the highest-quality policy advice across the public service.
And that it strengthens the quality of its workforce by attracting and retaining the best employees.
When we think of the highest qualities of public service, we can do no better than to think of Sir Robert Garran.
Sir Robert, we might say, is one of Australia's lesser-known founding fathers.
Yet he deserves a place in our national history as prominent as many of our political leaders at both state and federal level.
His influence on our legal, political and administrative system is incalculable.
As the first Secretary of the Attorney-General's Department, he drafted the legislation that shaped the first Departments and the first administrative arrangements of the Commonwealth.
Bear in mind that the High Court hadn't been established at the time - giving Sir Robert the first crack at interpreting the words of the new Constitution.
He was well qualified to do so, having been the secretary of the committee that drafted the Constitution and the joint author of the only annotated guide to it.
In the early days of the nation in 1901, Sir Robert didn't exactly have legions of public servants at his command.
He not only wrote out with his own hand Commonwealth Gazette No. 1 that proclaimed the establishment of the nation - he took it down to the Government Printer himself.
Truly, Sir Robert gave a whole new meaning to the term, whole-of-government.
For a few days, he was effectively the whole of our government - as Australia's only public servant.
And he held the Secretary's post for 31 years, earning the respect and trust of the 16 governments under which he served.
According to legend, Prime Minister Billy Hughes claimed that the best way to govern Australia was to have Robert Garran at his elbow, with a fountain pen and a blank sheet of paper.
It has even been said that whenever a crisis arose, Hughes could be heard yelling, "Where's Garran?"
Much has been written about Sir Robert's brilliant legal mind, his passion for the Commonwealth, and what former Crown Solicitor Fred Whitlam -- father of Gough -- described as his "serene wholeness". 
But it is also striking to see how ahead of his time he was in the causes he championed.
To give one example, decades before the Australian National University came into being, he saw the need to develop top-class education institutions and link them with the public service.
He proposed the establishment of a National University at Canberra that would have expertise in - and I quote:
"Oriental matters, Pacific relations, international relations generally, public administration, and economics''.
It is remarkable how closely the final shape of the ANU reflects Sir Robert's early proposal.
Like other ANU graduates, I consider myself a beneficiary of a vision that ultimately became a reality in the post-war era.
And Sir Robert's ideal of an outward-looking, engaged public service committed to the Westminster traditions of impartiality and integrity remains absolutely relevant today.
The task of the contemporary public service is to protect those enduring values, while transforming itself to meet the great challenges of our time.
That sounds as if I am asking the public service to change dramatically - and to stay the same.
And in a way I am.
But it is precisely those institutions that are most confident in their culture and traditions that are most able to embrace change.
I believe the Australian Public Service is such institution.
My confidence in the APS is based on many experiences during the past two years in government, as well as my own previous career experiences in the Federal and state public service.
A year ago, Australia was facing the greatest global economic crisis since the Great Depression.
In the early days of the crisis, advice from the Departments of Treasury and Finance was vital in developing the Nation Building Economic Stimulus plan that helped Australia to avoid recession and keep hundreds of thousands of Australians in work.
That advice was provided quickly, under intense pressure.
It was backed by clear reasoning and empirical analysis.
And once decided, it was implemented without delay.
In just 12 weeks, with the help of the tax agent industry, the Australian Tax Office processed stimulus payments to more than 8.4 million Australians.
Payments delivered on time and on an unprecedented scale. 
In the nine months since February, Commonwealth, state and territory public servants have approved nearly 50,000 major construction projects.
Half of them have begun and 2,000 are already complete.
Again, work on an unprecedented scale, executed at great speed and with great success.
The contribution of the APS has also gone beyond Australian domestic policy - a senior official in my Department has been instrumental in developing measures now adopted by the G20 on global financial standards.
The performance of the APS during the global financial crisis has been outstanding.
But while this shows that the APS performs well under pressure, crisis is not the everyday experience of government.
Just as important and more common is the day-to-day work of service delivery and the long-term challenge of providing top-quality policy advice.
How well the APS is performing those tasks is what the Advisory Group on APS reform has set out to test.
From its establishment in September, the Advisory Group was clear that the APS should aspire to be the best public service in the world.
This is an entirely appropriate aspiration.
After all, Australians aspire to being the world's best on the sporting field, in the marketplace, in the science and medical laboratory, and on stage and screen.
So too we should aspire to being a world leader in the quality of government - both in delivering government services and developing government policy.
If the public service wants to be the world's best, it must measure itself against the world's best.
This way, it can learn from the best, and become the best that it can be.
That is why the Advisory Group has commissioned a report from KPMG measuring the performance of the APS against eight of the world's best public services.
The report is being released today on the website of the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet.
It compares the APS to the public services of eight other nations: the United States, Britain, France, Denmark, Canada, the Netherlands, New Zealand and Singapore.
These are public services that consistently score highly in comparative international studies.
All have gone through significant reform in the past decade.
And all are explicitly looking to achieve excellence.
The report uses a variety of international studies, research tools and qualitative data to rate the nine administrations on the basis of six criteria essential to a top-performing public service.
They are:
     * a values-driven culture that retains public trust;
     * the ability to provide high-quality, forward-looking and creative advice;
     * delivery of high-quality programs and services that put the citizen first;
     * flexible and agile responses to changing realities and government priorities;
     * efficiency and effectiveness in all operations, and
     * ability to recruit, develop and retain the best employees.
Of course there are difficulties in making comparisons of such complex concepts, given the different contexts in which each service operates.
Even so, the report provides a valuable perspective on conditions in the Australian Public Service today.
First, there is no doubt that the APS measures up well against the world's leading public services.
Across the nine administrations, the ranking of the APS on different indicators ranged from near the top, to comparable, and to below average.
For example, the APS ranked highly for its independence and values - reflecting such factors as the level of political involvement in public sector appointments and the existence of legislation that clarified the roles of the public service compared to Ministers and advisers.
This supports the findings in the 2008 Institute for Management Development's World Competitiveness Yearbook which ranked Australia behind only Denmark and the Netherlands for its independence and culture of strong professional and ethical values.
The report also ranks the APS as a world leader - behind only Singapore and Denmark -- for its longstanding role in shaping government policies that have responded quickly and skilfully to changes in the economy.
Areas where the performance of the APS is on par with the overall performance of the group of eight public services include:
     * its efficiency in delivering outcomes for its size;
     * its ability to develop the skills and leadership capabilities of its workforce, and
     * its provision of online access to government information.
But there are also some measures where the APS does not perform so strongly.
One such area - as the Advisory Group suspected when it commissioned the report -- is the capacity of the APS to produce informed and forward-looking policy advice.
On one international measure of policy capability in OECD countries - the Sustainable Governance Indicators index, which measures organisational reform capacity of governments - only France ranked lower than Australia among the nine countries in the report.
However, we should note that the data on which Australia was ranked related to the years 2005 to 2007, during the previous Government's time in office.
As the report explains, the creators of the index judged that Australia's ranking was affected by the lack of a Government strategic plan to guide decision-making and insufficient consultation outside government to inform policy formation.
Since that time, there has been a change of government and the Government that I lead has adopted a cross-government strategic planning framework. 
The report also found Australia's public service to be less adept than other nations at incorporating non-government expertise and the views of citizens into its policy development and service design process.
This is something that the Government has been addressing since we came to office through measures such as community cabinets, reforms to Freedom of Information laws, the 2020 Summit and the development of a Web 2.0 plan.
The report also finds that more needs to be done to develop an overarching identity and mission to help the APS implement government priorities - in other words, to become a unified public service.
In short, we can take encouragement from this report.
By the highest global standards, the Australian Public Service is independent, professional, ethical and efficient.
But at the same time, its challenge now is to become more strategic and forward-looking, more outward-looking, and more citizen-centred.
To quote the report, the APS has "some way to go if it is to realise its ambition to be best in the world.''
The report largely confirmed the initial assessments of the Advisory Group and the Government of the strengths and gaps in the performance of the APS.
The APS needs to improve in three key areas:
     * service delivery;
     * the development of excellent policy advice, and
     * planning to ensure it has the highest-quality workforce to meet the challenges ahead.
As the report notes concerning the APS:
"It must manage high expectations from the public and Government, accommodate a greater role for citizens and users in the design and delivery of services, and adjust its operations to accommodate an ageing workforce and tight fiscal environment.''
I think this goes to the heart of what APS reform is all about.
It is about nothing less than the APS responding to fundamental changes in the economic, social, technological and cultural environments in which it operates - fundamental changes that require a redrawing of the relationship between citizens, governments and markets.
David Miliband, the United Kingdom's Foreign Secretary, recently predicted that this century will see three great power shifts - the shift of power from the national to the global level; the shift of power from the West to the East, and the shift of power away from governments towards individual citizens.
The last of these has profound implications for the future of the public service.
It is driven above all by the increased availability, reach and power of information - all of which is putting more power and choice in the hands of individuals.
When computerisation first reached governments in the 1970s and 1980s, there were fears it would create an all-seeing, all-powerful Big Brother state.
There still are risks that government agencies can misuse or mishandle the vast amount of personal information that they now process - a matter that the Government is addressing through the first comprehensive overall of the Privacy Act in more than twenty years.
But the lesson we have all learnt since Internet access became widespread in the 1990s is that information technology is changing the relationship between individuals and the state, in favour of individuals.
Individuals can access information in ways many of us could never have imagined at the beginning of our professional lives.
Consumers can compare prices of hotels in different cities, measure the on-time performance of competing airlines, track the progress of a parcel around the world.
Patients no longer just accept what their doctor tells them - they now go online to learn about their condition and treatment alternatives.
And over time, the Internet is changing the way citizens think about their rights, their responsibilities and their expectations of government.
It is a profoundly democratic force, whether you are in Ireland, India or Iran.
And it is a profoundly democratic force in Australia too, one with major consequences for the operation of government.
The first impact of changing technology and changing expectations is in day to day service delivery - which is the starting point for improving the average Australian family's encounter with government.
The hospital that treats our sick parent.
The school that teaches our child to read.
The education and training system that helps us to make the most of our natural gifts.
The welfare payments that assist us in times of ill fortune or old age.
These services are at the core of what governments do.
Ensuring that they are of the highest quality is essential to achieving this Government's ambition to forge a stronger, fairer nation, equipped to meet the challenges of the future.
After all, we have a lot of skin in the game.
We not only provide substantial funds toward the delivery of state and territory public services, we also directly deliver more than $4 billion in services every year through a range of agencies.
And we need to know more about how well these services are delivered.
Unlike Canada - which holds a three-yearly national survey of public satisfaction levels with services across three levels of government - we have no measurement across the whole of government of the quality of service delivery.
We know some things, and they are heartening.
In 2007, the Australian Public Service Commission collated the results of client surveys for 18 government agencies, and found that on average 80 per cent of clients were satisfied with the services the agencies provided.
And in a 2008 British study of citizen satisfaction with service delivery across a range of countries, Australia rated highly.
This is a good start.
But there is still a widespread view in the community that government agencies are bureaucratic and unresponsive to individual needs.
And those views reflect real life experiences that many people can remember.
Too many Australians experience dealing with government as cumbersome and time-consuming.
Too many public services are duplicated or otherwise not efficiently delivered.
Too many citizens in remote and regional Australia - and too many citizens with the highest needs - are not getting the services they require.
A poor interaction with a government agency is one of the most frustrating experiences anyone can have.
Because while public sector agencies often describe citizens as "customers", the truth is that they can't just wander down the street and choose to deal with a different government.
And when people are dealing with the government, they are normally dealing with matters that are of great importance to them - like obtaining an age pension, renewing a passport or paying their tax.
At a federal level, Centrelink has shown itself to be a model of a modern, more client-focused arm of government service delivery.
Its network of more than three hundred customer service centres and more than one thousand service delivery points provides a range of services - usually at the one counter.
Similarly, its Mobile Office, formerly known as the Drought Bus, offers access to a range of services to people affected by natural disasters such as drought, flood and fire.
Those services range from financial support to advice on tax, health and even depression and counselling services.
Many people affected by Victoria's devastating Black Saturday bushfires earlier this year have praised Centrelink for its exceptional response to the crisis.
Centrelink worked with the Victorian Government to run ten Community Service Hubs that offered victims rapid access to government services.
When people came in looking for help, they weren't directed to five offices or five different counters.
Instead, public servants sat down with them to find out what they needed.
Only later did the officials sort out how, and through which department, the service would be delivered.
That kind of service makes a real difference in a time of crisis.
To illustrate the importance of what Centrelink did, consider the remarks of one resident of Kinglake, Steve Fleming, on ABC radio earlier this year.
He noted that he'd only ever heard bad things about Centrelink before the fires. But, and I quote:
"The experience we have had here with the Centrelink people has been just marvellous. All the bad experiences I have heard of people having with government institutions has just gone out the window.''
Centrelink's response to the bushfires is the sort of integrated approach to service delivery that we need to spread across all government agencies.
The Internet provides a great opportunity to make this happen - but as the Advisory Group report shows, a number of overseas countries are ahead of us.
In the Netherlands the Internet has become so important to service provision that the Government has established an e-Citizen Charter setting out citizens' rights and government responsibilities in online service delivery.
And Denmark has created a citizen web portal that provides a gateway to government services, while also offering e-voting and online discussion forums about government policy.
Citizens find information about services by modelling their personal circumstances against 12 different online "personas" that reflect different life stages and situations.
They can then find and store their personal data relating to government services through a My Page function.
They no longer have to navigate through information on a raft of services administered by a range of different agencies.
And during the portal's first year of operation in 2007, it attracted an average of 80,000 unique users every day - among a population of only 5.5 million people.
The Australian Government has begun to use information as a way to strengthen our relationship with citizens, and to be accountable for the services we provide or support.
Our healthcare reform process is looking at introducing individual e-health records to give patients access to their own medical data and allow them to take charge of their own health management.
Next year, for the first time, we plan to give parents access to information about the literacy and numeracy performance of their childrens' schools through our My School Website.
Such information will expose strengths and weaknesses in the system, improve parent choice, and drive our policy response.
Transparency will not always be comfortable - but it is essential for accountability and improved outcomes.
In addition, by the end of this year, our Government 2.0 Taskforce will report on how we can use information technology to strengthen the relationship between government and citizen.
That includes ways to give citizens greater access to government information, and to hear their ideas for how government programs and services can be better delivered.
Improved service delivery is just the start of our ambition for APS reform.
The second great challenge is to ensure that the APS produces the innovative and strategic policy advice for the long-term good of the nation.
Since coming to power two years ago, the Government - in partnership with states and territories - has embarked on a highly ambitious national reform agenda.
We have made substantial investments in education and training in order to lift national productivity and give more Australians the chance to make the most of their human potential.
We are introducing reforms in 27 priority areas to lift unnecessary regulation and create a seamless national economy.
We have for the first time provided national leadership in water reform to secure water supplies in both rural and urban areas, in the face of an extended drought and a changing climate.
We are reforming the health and hospital system to give more choice to patients and to meet the needs of an ageing population.
We are establishing a framework through which we will shape our cities so that they remain economically dynamic, environmentally sustainable and socially equitable as our national population grows by 13 million in the next 40 years.
These challenges are highly complex, involving many stakeholders and much disagreement about the best means to address them.
They require partnerships among all tiers of government, and between the public sector, the private sector and community organisations.
They require rigorous analysis of the evidence and careful measurement of outcomes over time.
Australia's future challenges require neither old, bureaucratic, state-centred solutions, on the one hand.
Nor hands-off risk management and contracting out of core government responsibilities on the other.
Instead, they require the highest quality strategic policy advice.
This requires innovation and openness to the best thinking from around the world.
It requires over-the-horizon thinking, so that governments are making responsible policy decisions mindful of their impacts on future generations.
And it requires work on how we design markets in ways that address market failures and address long-term challenges.
For example, our Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme will for the first time create a carbon price and a carbon market as the centrepiece of Australia's response to climate change.
The Government does not tell businesses and individuals how they should reduce their carbon use through the CPRS.
But it sets the framework of the market - the rules of the game - in which companies and citizens can make their own decisions.
This approach will deliver the lowest cost pathway to reduced carbon pollution.
Similarly, by establishing a price for water, the emerging water market is helping to improve the efficiency of water use in rural Australia, while enabling farmers to cope with a future with less water.
These frameworks are based on social values - that Australia must act to use water more efficiently and cut its carbon emissions over time.
We are a Government that believes in markets - but markets that function in the long-term interests of Australians.
Markets that they create opportunities and choice but also reduce inequality and ensure fairness.
If we help design these markets well, we will strengthen the new relationship between the citizen and the state.
Just as the best service delivery unfailingly puts people first, innovative market design will not only safeguard citizens' rights, it will give them informed choices over how they live their lives.
To embrace such over-the-horizon thinking we need a highly skilled public service.
In essence, we need public servants who possess the finest public service traditions of impartiality and honesty, but who are also open to good ideas about public policy, wherever they come from.
As the benchmarking report shows, the best public services are exploring how to encourage smart, bold thinking - from their own employees and from citizens.
In Denmark, the Mindlab unit brings businesses and citizens together with public servants to find fresh ideas to tackle policy challenges such as integration of immigrants and climate change.
In Singapore, the Enterprise Challenge even provides financial incentives to citizens who come up with innovative ideas for service delivery.
Here, the Advisory Group is considering a similar model in the creation of Strategic Policy Centres.
These centres would free public servants from their daily duties so they could collaborate on ideas with a range of outsiders - including academics, business people and overseas researchers.
Parts of the APS are already collaborating with outside expertise in this way - sometimes by bringing them in on specific projects and inviting them to share their skills.
But the APS will never abandon its mission to invest its own people.
And where we bring in outside expertise, we should always do so with the goal of transferring lasting skills to our own people.
Building the capability of the APS is central to the Government's vision for public service reform.
That is why the Advisory Group has already identified a major investment in education and development of staff as one of its key recommendations for reform.
To put it simply, we want the best people for what I think are some of the best jobs in the country.
And they are designing policies and delivering programs that change the lives of Australians, for the better and for the long-term.
This is the third great challenge the Advisory Group and the benchmarking report have identified.
I have already spoken at greater length about the Government's priorities for the future of the APS workforce, both in my address to the Senior Executive Service last year and the Paterson Oration at the Australian National University in September.
For all that we say about institutions and processes, the public service is no more and no less than its people.
That is why we need the best possible workforce - we need to attract them; we need to invest in them; and we need to retain them.
Over the next 40 years, the ageing of the population will change the APS, as it will change Australia at large.
Even today, nearly a quarter of APS employees are older than 50.
In the next 10 years, nearly three-quarters of Senior Executive Service employees will be eligible for retirement.
Over the coming decade, just as the APS is losing some of its best older staff, it will have to compete within a shrinking pool of younger recruits, relative to the population at large. 
An analysis by the OECD in 2007 suggests there is scope to improve the way we respond to the ageing of the public sector workforce across all levels of government - in particular by improving future workforce planning and providing incentives for older employees to stay in work.
The task ahead for the APS is to attract and retain a large share of talented younger employees, while also encouraging its finest older employees to stay on the job.
Addressing these reform challenges will be the job of the Advisory Group.
And I look forward to receiving the Group's recommendations early next year.
The challenges ahead for the Australian Public Service are substantial.
But I have every confidence that the APS has the capacity to meet those future challenges, through the reform process we are now undertaking.
If we still had Sir Robert Garran with us, I think he would understand the fundamental challenge that lies ahead:
To sustain, strengthen and renew the values of impartiality, honesty, candid advice and commitment to excellence that mark the Westminister tradition of public service.
And at the same time, to undertake the changes necessary to be meet the challenges of the future.
The APS has managed such processes of change and reform in the past.
In 1996 a review of the Public Service Act led, among other things, to the replacement of much outdated and cumbersome regulation.
13 years before in 1983, the Hawke Government's White Paper, Reforming the Australian Public Service, unleashed a decade of change that profoundly enhanced the efficiency and professionalism of the APS.
In 1976, the Coombs Commission set in train reforms that over time led to a more devolved public service, a more diverse workforce and a stronger focus on service delivery. 
In the 1960s, Sir Frederick Wheeler, as head of the Public Service Board, introduced the reforms that led to the hiring of more graduates, women and Indigenous Australians, and in other ways laid the groundwork for the professional public service of today.
All of these changes built on the foundation that Sir Robert had laid in 1901 - in writing out Commonwealth Gazette Number One.
In 2009, we continue building on those strong foundations - with the sure confidence that the Australian Public Service has every chance to become what it rightly aspires to be - the best public service in the world.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
I thank Jim Wallace for his invitation today and I am pleased today to be the first serving Prime Minister to address the Australian Christian Lobby's national conference.
In speaking to you today, I also acknowledge the enormous contribution of Australia's churches and church communities throughout our nation's history.
The history books often recount the great moments of conflict and change in our nation's story - war, depression and political strife.
But they can miss out on the quiet years that also shape a nation's character and destiny.
The years when people are going about their normal lives - working hard, raising a family, building communities and building the institutions that sustain a nation through the good times and the bad.
If we studied those quiet years more closely, I believe we'd all better appreciate the profoundly important role of our churches and religious institutions in our national life.
The work of sustaining community life in times of celebration and times of grief and loss.
The work of caring for those at life's extremities, those in need of care in our hospitals, our aged care homes and our refuges.
The work of improving opportunity for all through our schools.
The work of helping shape the values that are essential for a healthy society - values of compassion, of tolerance, of sacrifice for others, of hard work, of responsibility, of self-respect, - and of the equal dignity of every human being.
And the work of helping people to wrestle with deeper questions of meaning.
This isn't noisy work - it's quiet work.
Yet it's the work that builds a nation.
Work that builds families.
Work that builds communities.
Work that strengthens the social fabric - or the social capital - of the nation.
And we must all be attentive to how stressed our social fabric - and with that our families - have become with the challenges of 21st century life.
Of course like governments and other organisations, churches and church institutions have sometimes failed to live up to those values.
The apology to the Forgotten Australians and Child Migrants in the past week was a sharp reminder of that.
Among the stories of those men and women raised in orphanages and institutions run by the state, by churches and by charities, there are many heart-wrenching stories of neglect and outright abuse - physical, psychological and sexual.
The truth is, the church and the state failed badly to provide the love and protection that a child needs as he or she grows up.
And for these grave offences we must both be sorry.
Churches now have an important role to play now in making those Forgotten Australians into the Remembered Australians.
For this is the only way to go about healing broken lives.
This coming Tuesday will mark the second anniversary of the Government's 2007 election win.
We have faced enormous challenges over the past two years.
Challenges that were barely on the radar in November 2007.
By September 2008, the worst global economic downturn in three-quarters of a century was threatening to slam into Australia.
As the crisis unfolded fully, we had just one clear goal.
To do everything we could to cushion our economy, our communities and our families from the full impact of a global economic cyclone by supporting jobs right around Australia.
To keep as many Australians as possible in work.
So as many families as possible continue to have at least one breadwinner, and children do not have to face the insecurity and instability common in jobless families.
We know the toll that unemployment can take on even the strongest families.
We have seen in the post-war period the destructive cycle of successive generations of unemployment, welfare dependency and the destruction of the human spirit.
So we were determined to do all we could to keep as many families as possible out of that cycle.
To learn from history.
Not to repeat it.
That's why we took strong, early and decisive action to build a stronger Australia.
And our actions have been effective.
Australia is the only advanced economy to so far stay out of recession.
Australia has the second lowest unemployment rate of all the major advanced economies - so that today, hundreds of thousands of children have been saved from the trauma of seeing mums and dads losing their jobs.
And we have done so with the lowest debt and deficit of any of the Major Advanced Economies.
Nevertheless, many, many Australian families have been doing it tough through this crisis.
Economic downturns invariably hit the most vulnerable people in our community the hardest.
That reality has underscored the strength of the Government's commitment to building a fairer Australia - a nation where it is possible for everyone to enjoy a decent family life.
We have honoured our commitment to abolish Work Choices, replacing it with a fair and modern industrial relations system that gets the balance right.
We have built a decent safety net of conditions that removes the incentive for employers to make employees work unsociable hours, by ending Australian Workplace Agreements that stripped away penalty rates and overtime pay.
We are introducing into all awards and enterprise agreements a provision for individual flexibility that makes it easier for employees to negotiate family-friendly work arrangements.
We have decided to introduce Australia's first system of paid parental leave, and we have extended rights to parental leave to make it easier for parents to choose to stay at home during the earliest years of a child's life.
We have initiated the greatest ever Commonwealth investment in social housing and in tackling the scourge of homelessness - because we know that without a place to live, it is difficult for people to find work, for kids to study and for people to make a fresh start to get their lives back together.
Our first White Paper was entitled A Place to Call Home - with the aim of halving homeless for the more than 105,000 Australians who currently are without a place to call home.
And as part of the Nation Building Economic Stimulus plan, we are building almost 20,000 units of social housing for the neediest Australians.
We have implemented the largest reform of our age pension since it was introduced one hundred years ago - raising the single age pension by $32 per week to help the most vulnerable Australians to make ends meet.
We are investing in the quality of education in our most disadvantaged schools.
We have made the apology to the Stolen Generations, and we are taking action to close the gap on Indigenous disadvantage.
As I have said before, I do not believe that in Australia you can successfully advance an economic reform agenda without a complementary agenda to help strengthen our social fabric by providing maximum support for families under pressure.
We should not have to choose between faster growth and a fairer society.
It is not easy tackling the complex challenges of closing the gap on Indigenous disadvantage, halving homelessness, or supporting families and building more resilient communities where there's been decades of multiple disadvantage.
In working to build a fairer Australia, we recognise that we cannot be effective if governments merely act alone.
Governments must work in partnership with local people and with community-based organisations to deliver lasting results.
As we work to build a stronger and fairer Australia, the Australian Government is strongly committed to continuing to strengthen our partnerships with organisations in the 'third sector' - many of which are church or faith-based organisations.
That is why we have been working with many community organisations this year towards establishing a Compact with the Third Sector.
As we continue to build a stronger Australia and fairer Australia, the Government is also determined to prepare our nation for the challenges of the future.
We are taking action on climate change.
We are tackling the challenge of long-term health and hospital reform.
We are seeking to build the best educated, best skilled, best trained workforce of any in the world.
A country where we halve homelessness.
Where we close the gap with our Indigenous brothers and sisters.
Where we don't allow the fair go to slide out the back door.
This is the kind of Australia we can build together.
The focus of the ACL's conference this weekend is how we as a society care for the best interests of our children.
Governments have fundamental obligations relating to the safety and protection of children, as well as ensuring that every child has the opportunity to achieve their potential through the opportunity of a world class education.
That is why the Government that I lead is committed to an education revolution in Australia.
I spoke about the need for an education revolution in my maiden speech in 1998, shortly after being elected to Parliament.
After I was elected as Leader of the Opposition, the first policy paper that I released was entitled The Australian Economy Needs an Education Revolution.
And since coming to office, the Australian Government has got that education revolution underway.
We have set out goals to achieve:
     * universal access to preschool for four year olds by 2013;
     * a 90 per cent year twelve retention rate by 2015;
     * halving the number of 20 to 64 year olds without a minimum certificate III level qualification by 2020, and
     * providing a university place to an additional 50,000 students by 2013.
To achieve these goals the Government has increased investment in education by around 50 per cent in real terms over the current five year period compared with the previous 5 years.
This includes investments in computers for schools, in the largest school modernisation program in Australia's history, building trades training centres in schools across the nation, establishing a national school curriculum and steps to increase teacher quality.
In short, the Government is delivering on our commitment to an education revolution.
Beyond these measures, the Government recognises that we have a wider responsibility for the care and nurture children in our schools.
If a child is struggling, or there are problems at home, it's the school environment where this is most likely to be seen.
And it is within the school environment where we can make a real difference in supporting children and supporting parents when they need help.
That is why I have always been a strong supporter of the role of chaplains in our schools - because they make a difference.
Just three months ago on the Sunshine Coast, where I grew up, we saw a remarkable demonstration of the positive impact that school chaplains can have on their community.
A couple in their 50s, Allan and Kari Taylor, were killed in the most tragic circumstances in a road accident on the Sunshine Motorway.
In the days that followed, we saw a snapshot of just how important school chaplains can be in the life of a community, as hundreds of kids, parents and members of the community told moving stories of how Allan and Kari had made a difference in their lives.
For those who don't know the story, let me give you a bit of their history.
Kari and I went to school together at Nambour High.
In fact, we once debated against each other on the question of: "Does God exist?"
I'm a little reluctant to admit it to this audience - but I was on the negative side.
Kari argued the affirmative - and won.
I still contend the room was stacked.
Kari was one of the first students from Nambour to be accepted into the Queensland Conservatorium of Music, where she graduated with a Diploma of Performing Arts.
She could easily have used her talents to pursue a career in opera.
But instead, she chose to use her voice and her gifts in her community, serving alongside Allan.
She met Allan when he became the SunCoast Christian College's first high school teacher.
Allan went on to become principal.
But nine years ago, he gave up that role.
Because he felt he could make a greater difference as a school chaplain.
That was a remarkable step - after all, being a chaplain doesn't carry much social status, while being a principal does.
But Allan was interested not in status, but in service.
He wanted to make a difference in the lives of the kids and the families in his community - and he saw the best way of doing that was by being a chaplain.
Allan led the way as the first primary school chaplain on the Sunshine Coast.
He was always there to help and support kids in the community as a chaplain and a mentor.
After that tragic accident, more than 3,000 people attended their funeral.
Many of them carried personal stories of the ways that Allan or Kari had helped, supported and inspired them, often through difficult times in their lives - stories that may never be told.
But what we saw in the lives and the tragic deaths of Allan and Kari was a strong testimony to the work of school chaplains - the quiet work that is making a difference in the lives of thousands of families every day.
I have been a supporter of school chaplaincies since my time in the Queensland Government almost twenty years ago, as chief of staff to Premier Wayne Goss and then as the Director General of the Cabinet Office.
It was during this period that we formalised arrangements through the state education department for school chaplains to operate in our schools.
The Queensland Department of Education formally approved the Scripture Union of Queensland as the employing authority for state school chaplains.
And the first chaplain was employed at Kelvin Grove State High School, followed by chaplains at the Mitchelton and Craigslea State High Schools.
The development of these formal arrangements for school chaplaincy acted as a catalyst for the education department to develop chaplaincy guidelines, which were first published in 1993.
When these guidelines came into effect, Scripture Union Queensland was the only employer to seek employer accreditation Queensland-wide, and as a result became the predominant chaplaincy employer in the state.
And it is still the most significant group coordinating chaplaincy services, with the strong support of local communities across the state.
We supported the role of chaplains and other student welfare staff such as counsellors and pastoral care workers because we recognised that schools are key institutions in the lives of kids and their families.
School chaplains and counsellors are in a unique position to help young people navigate the often choppy waters of adolescence.
And for many kids, the emotional challenges of those years can affect their capacity to study, to learn and sometimes even to survive - which is why it is appropriate for governments to support chaplaincy programs.
Chaplains do great work.
They provide a listening ear for individual students - who are often more comfortable talking to a chaplain or a counsellor than a teacher, because they see them as being independent of the school authorities.
They provide an additional adult role model in the school.
They help connect the school community, including parents and teachers as well as children themselves.
They organise informal school activities where students can make new friendships and develop new interests.
They can arrange expert help with specific challenges, such as dealing with family breakdown, bullying, self-esteem, drugs, grief and behavioural management problems.
And when critical incidents affect a school - such as the bushfires earlier this year in Victoria - they can play a very important active role in helping the community cope with those hard times.
Like the story of Jeff Lampard, one of two part-time chaplains at Kinglake West Primary School.
After the Black Saturday bushfires, a Year Six student at the school burrowed himself into bags of clothes and toys in the corner of his classroom.
He wouldn't talk, and he wouldn't come out.
It took Jeff two and a half hours to coax the boy out of his burrow.
And it turned out that this boy had survived the bushfires by wrapping himself in a wet sheet and running for his life as his house burnt, as cars and gas cylinders exploded around him.
He lost friends, and all of his possessions.
But in those hours that Jeff spent gently and patiently talking to him, they established a connection that became so important to that boy in the weeks and months following the fires.
Not all students express their distress and pain as openly as the little boy from Kinglake West.
Some mask their feelings.
Last month, a young lady named Alex told her story to at Rockhampton's School Chaplaincy fundraising dinner.
Alex is 22 now.
But when she was 15 and in Year 10, she wanted to end her life.
And she told that dinner that she probably would have, had her school chaplain not intervened and helped her talk to a counsellor.
As Alex said, and I quote:
"School chaplains are friends amongst the students. Students are more comfortable talking to a chaplain as a friend..."
The National School Chaplaincy Program was commenced in 2007 as a three-year program providing funding for up to $20,000 per annum for schools for a maximum of three years, to fund chaplains.
Since its inception, around 2,700 schools have received funding under the program.
It is not always understood that when the previous Government established this program, they only funded it for a three year period. This means that no future allocation of funding was made for the program beyond three years.
In other words, the funding then dropped dead.
It had not been included in the Budget as a permanent program for the future.
These are the facts - whatever some people might be claiming about that today.
The clear feedback I have received from schools, parents and communities around the nation is that this has been a successful program.
It has enhanced the well-being of students and school communities.
As Michael Lamb, of the Baxter Primary School Council on the Mornington Peninsula, wrote to me last month:
"Our School Chaplain provides advice, counselling, wisdom, and a warm welcome for any member of the school community who may have an issue or need support. She is not perceived by families to be part of the official 'system' within the school, and is seen to be accessible by some parents and children who may hesitate to approach the Principal or other staff member with an issue."
And I know that many teachers value the extra resource that a chaplain provides in their busy day.
As Sharon Williamson, a trained teacher who works as a chaplain at a school here in the ACT, wrote to me:
"I often look around at classrooms and watch the children who need that extra support, that extra bit of care and that extra bit of communication and trust for others. As a teacher, we are so consumed with an overwhelming curriculum that - as much as we would like to - it is hard to offer that extra portion to our students who can use support. Bring in the school Chaplain and the need is filled."
Or as this principal told researchers studying the effectiveness of the program:
"As a young male in an all female staff, the chaplain has provided a good male role model for our boys in particular."
Wherever they operate, there is strong support for chaplaincies for school principals, teachers, parents and kids themselves.
School chaplains make a difference.
That is why today I can confirm today that the Government will be continuing the school chaplaincy program.
We will guarantee funding for the next two years until December 2011 for schools currently funded under the National School Chaplaincy Program.
This will involve a total additional investment of $42 million over the 2010 and 2011 school years.
This does two things.
It provides certainty for our schools and chaplains.
And it provides the Government with further time to consult with the community and evaluate the best long-term shape of the program.
During the course of 2010, the Government will be consulting widely over the future shape of chaplaincy and pastoral care programs beyond 2011.
We are doing this because we want to hear your views about ways the long-term program can be improved.
While there is no denying the success of the National School Chaplaincy Program, it could be improved to better accommodate schools in rural and regional areas, small schools and schools in disadvantaged communities.
As one principal told researchers:
"Our school has a chaplain because of deep need. We employed the chaplain prior to the Government funding. We thus did not fit the criteria for Chaplaincy funding."
That's why we will be seeking to engage with you, with representatives of churches, parents, school communities, state education departments, and other interested parties around the nation as we examine the best way to support pastoral care initiatives in the future.
School chaplaincies are only one important way in which the Government is taking action to protect and support children and young Australians.
The Government is developing a National Strategy for Young Australians to tackle many of the greatest challenges facing the three and a half million young Australians aged 12 to 24 - including binge drinking, youth violence, drug usage, mental health problems and body image.
We are implementing a $126 million Cyber Safety Plan to improve cyber-safety for children and young Australians - funding almost 100 extra police officers in child protection work, and undertaking a pilot trial of filtering technologies to identify the best way forward to make the internet safer.
We are implementing a National Binge Drinking Strategy, including community level initiatives, early intervention strategies and a national advertising campaign that confronts young people with the potential consequences of binge drinking.
I have also asked the Minister for Home Affairs, Brendan O'Connor to work with State and Territory Police Commissioners on how we face up to the problem of alcohol-fuelled violence on our streets - including establishing clear cut legal consequences for breaking the law.
And I intend to take this matter to discussions with State and Territory leaders at the COAG meeting next month.
In each of these areas, there is great potential for the Government to work in partnership with church and community organisations - to support children and young Australians, and to support the families and communities who nurture and support them.
Such partnerships are important.
In the complex world of the 21st century, governments must work together with the whole community to tackle the difficult social problems that we confront.
Churches and faith-based organisations are among our most important partners in that challenge.
You have been doing this quiet work since the first days of European settlement in this nation.
And your work will continue to be of great importance as we confront the challenges that lie ahead.
The Australian Government greatly values the contribution of the nation's churches and faith-based organisations, and we look forward to continuing to build stronger partnerships in the years to come. 


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
We gather again today to along this avenue of heroes.
Today we gather to recognise courage.
Today we gather to render thanks.
Today we gather to remember those we have lost.
Those who have been wounded.
Those who bear the scars of war - scars visible and scars unseen.
We gather here at a place inscribed with all the chapters of Australia's proud military history and to mark the end of another of those chapters.
A chapter in which around 20,000 brave Australian men and women followed in the footsteps of millions of brave Australians before them.
In the footsteps of those who carved out the Anzac legend on the beaches of Gallipoli.
Of those who were slaughtered in the killing fields of Flanders.
Of the million Australians who fought in Europe, North Africa and the Pacific in the battle to defend Australia.
Of those who fought in Korea, in the Malaya emergency and in Konfrontasi.
Of the 60,000 who served in Vietnam.
Of those who served in the first Gulf War.
And those who as we meet here today at this great memorial are now writing the next chapters in Afghanistan, in the Solomon Islands, and in East Timor.
Today we mark the end of Operation CATALYST.
We pay tribute to the thousands of brave men and women in uniform who answered the call of the democratically elected government of Australia.
We pay tribute to the hundreds of Australian civilians who provided critical communications, training, intelligence, logistical and policy support to this operation.
We pay tribute to our diplomats in the field.
In a fully professional response to a decision of the government of Australia, you, the men and women of the Australian Defence Forces, discharged your mission in Iraq with distinction and with success.
We recognise the contribution of all those who participated.
We remember, too, those we lost.
We remember Warrant Officer David Nary.
We remember Private Jake Kovco.
We remember Flight Lieutenant Paul Pardoel
For their spirit remains with us still in this avenue of heroes.
We thank their families and their loved ones for their courage and their sacrifice.
There are also those of you who have returned wounded from your service. 
Your service will not be forgotten.
Your needs will be met consistent with conditions of service of all our veterans past, our veterans now, and our veterans of the future.
This is the solemn responsibility of all governments of Australia whatever their colour or hue, and however old our last remaining veteran may be.
Operation CATALYST ran from July 2003 until July 2009.
Our Army personnel trained approximately 36,000 Iraqi Army soldiers, including specialist training in logistics support and counter-insurgency operations.
Our Navy personnel contributed a Major Fleet Unit as an enduring presence in the Gulf and to protect the Khawr Al Amayah and Al Basrah oil terminals.
The RAN also provided a training team to work with Iraqi Coastal Defence.
Our Air Force personnel provided intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance and other support to both Coalition maritime and ground forces as well as providing air traffic control and air-lift support.
The constant refrain from other commanders in the field, from political leaders around the world and from General Petraeus as Supreme Allied Commander is that your service was exemplary.
Wherever you serve, my experience is that they always want more of you.
Whether in headquarters functions.
Or in the field.
The refrain is universal.
You are professional.
You are superbly trained.
You know your craft.
You are practical.
You are adaptable.
You are approachable.
You are sensitive to the cultures of the local people.
You are, in short, great ambassadors for Australia.
Trooper Mark Donaldson, our first Victoria Cross for Australia recipient since Vietnam, represented our country at Remembrance Day ceremonies in London last week.
And expressed his great wish for this generation of the Australian Defence Force - that Australians acknowledge their service and sacrifice with the same degree of reverence as we do those who fought in the two World Wars.
There is reason to think that many Australians agree with Trooper Donaldson.
The numbers who continue to attend ANZAC Day Dawn Services and parades...
Those who observe a minute's silence at the 11th hour of the 11th day of the 11th month.
Those who learn with pride in our schools the great feats of courage rendered by the ADF from the first day of its formation.
You, numbered among the 18,000 veterans of this campaign, are the ANZACs of today.
As we salute the contribution of the troops here today, and around Australia, brought safely back to our shores, we are mindful that more than 100 ADF and many civilians remain in Iraq to provide protection and expertise to our Embassy and the United Nations Mission.
These troops and civilian Defence Staff are providing the ongoing assistance to our continuing civilian mission.
To continue our work to build a stable Iraq.
Let none of us assume they are out of danger's way - for they are not.
To the troops of Operation CATALYST - Australia welcomes you home with a great sense of relief and a great sense of pride.
On behalf of the nation, I thank you.
To your parents, I say thank you.
To your wives, husbands, partners and children, I say thank you.
This grateful nation, Australia, salutes you.



I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
I also acknowledge the excellent work of everyone involved with tonight's awards in raising the profile of the concerns of people with disabilities across the nation.
And I'd particularly like to thank the Minister, Jenny Macklin, and the Parliamentary Secretary for Disabilities, Bill Shorten, who are both extremely dedicated to real improvements for people with disabilities and those who care for them.
There are many statistics that inform us about the condition of people living with disability across Australia.
But they only tell one part of the story.
The personal tragedies behind the statistics tell a damning tale.
The kids left in respite because their parents are just too exhausted to cope.
People left without the basic services and equipment they need to get out of bed in the morning.
People denied the chance to work and study or take advantage of opportunities for a better life.
Discriminated against, shut out and isolated because of the attitudes of others and the inadequacy of support available.
For far too long, people with disability in this country have had to battle for the right to live their life to its full potential.
For far too long, people with disability have had to battle a service system that simply isn't up to meeting their complex needs. 
The Australian Government is determined to work with you to make sure people with disability have the opportunity to be involved in their communities, to where possible have a job and to have a life that is meaningful and worthwhile.
After years of neglect, there is a lot of catching up to do.
And again I'd like to pay tribute to the hard work that Jenny and Bill have been doing.
Thanks to their efforts, we've made a start by:
     * Doubling the funding to the States and Territories under the National Disability Agreement, including the highest ever level of indexation;
     * Increasing the Disability Support Pension for around 720,000 Australians, and giving extra payments to carers; and
     * Ratifying the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities - with Australia becoming one of the first Western countries to do so.
But we know there is much more to be done.
Australian Institute of Health and Welfare figures released last week show that there will be around 1.5 million people with severe disability by next year, and almost 2.3 million by 2030. 
Recent trends indicate that demand for specialist disability services will grow by around 7 per cent a year in real terms - this would indicate a doubling of cost by 2020.
How we care for people with a disability is a fundamental matter that goes to our values and our character as a nation.
But it is also a matter of responsible economic management.
Australian governments spend approximately $20 billion a year in total on the disability welfare system:
     * Around $8 billion on payments to community care and support providers Nearly $3 billion on payments to family and other informal carers; and
     * Almost $9 billion in income support through the Disability Support Pension for over 700,000 Australians.
This is a substantial investment of public resources.
But while significant assistance is provided to people with disabilities, there are many weaknesses in the support systems that governments provide.
National long-term care and support scheme for people with disability.
The Australian Government believes that we need to rethink how we support people with disability and identify what new approaches are needed.
We need a system that provides greater incentives for early intervention and incentives to help people with disability participate in work and the community. 
A system that provides some certainty for people with a disability and their families, no matter where they live, and how they acquired their disability.
A system that is not based on rationed services, and is not crisis-driven.
We know this is what people with disability want and it's also the most cost-effective and efficient solution. 
One idea that has united disability consumer and advocacy groups, the disability service sector and carer organisations, is a national long-term care and support scheme for people with disability. 
This was one of the ideas to emerge from the Australia 2020 Summit.
It has come up again and again in consultations all across the country for the National Disability Strategy. And in the Who Cares? - Report on The Inquiry into Better Support for Carers conducted by the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Family, Community, Housing and Youth earlier this year.
A long-term care and support scheme would look at an individual's needs, across their whole lifetime, and determine what support is needed and when.
My colleague, Bill Shorten, has called it a big idea. That's somewhat of an understatement. 
It would be a historic social reform.
It would require transformative change to the disability service system - how it is delivered, funded and administered. 
But it could help us achieve a clear, overriding objective of the Australian Government - building a fairer Australia, with the goal that all Australians can reach their full potential in life.
It requires detailed and considered examination to see if it the outcomes it promises can be delivered.
But we believe now is the time to examine this option in detail.
That's why I am pleased to announce today that the Australian Government will engage the Productivity Commission to carry out an Inquiry into a National Long-term Care and Support Scheme. 
Starting early next year, the Commission will look into the costs, benefits and feasibility of approaches which provide essential care and support - on an entitlement basis - for eligible people with a severe or profound disability. 
It will look at a no-fault social insurance model reflecting the shared risk of disability across the population - strongly supported by many of you here tonight - as well as other options for long-term care and support, building on international best practice. 
It will also consider the complex but critical interactions with other schemes and systems - income support, aged care, and state based compensation schemes. 
An Associate Commissioner with specialist disability expertise will also be appointed to support the review.
Reform in this area is not something that can be undertaken lightly.
Some people live with disability from birth.
Others have their lives forever changed in an instant as a result of a traumatic event.
Sitting in the House of Representatives tonight are two people who know that only too well.
Paul Anicich and Tony Purkiss were among the Australians targeted in the 2005 Bali bombings.
This feasibility study will look at how long-term care and support can be provided to all people with a disability, including those who acquire it as a result of a traumatic event.
The study will consider coverage and entitlements, and implications for health services.
The very personal consequences for many thousands of Australians with disabilities, their carers and their families demand a well thought-out study. 
We need to do the work. 
And we need to get it right. 
That is why the inquiry will be assisted by an Independent Panel.
This panel will guarantee that the inquiry hears the views of the disability sector.
We will be announcing the Panel appointments shortly. 
The Inquiry will report to Minister Macklin and Bill Shorten in July 2011 and is a key plank of the National Disability Strategy - a 10 year blueprint for improving the participation of people with disability in all areas of life. 
Thousands of people across Australia responded to our consultations on the National Disability Strategy.
At these consultations, people with disabilities, their families, friends and carers gave us a clear message.
They want Australia to change. 
They want an inclusive Australia.
An enabling Australia.
An Australia that treats them equally and gives them opportunities to fulfil their potential. 
The Strategy will drive improvements in performance across Commonwealth, and state and territory governments.
Not only in disability systems but, importantly, mainstream systems where it is vital that we improve our responses in areas such as education, transport, housing, health, communications and human rights.
To this end I am pleased to announce that the Australian Government is now moving to include the National Disability Strategy within our COAG reform agenda.
That means we will be seeking the support of all states and territories in implementing the national strategy.
And next year, we will be releasing a robust and integrated approach to the National Disability Strategy.
But tonight we are here to present The National Disability Awards.
In presenting these awards, I want to acknowledge the strong support that my wife Therese has given as patron of the International Day of People with Disability and the National Disability Awards.
These awards are a true celebration.
They celebrate not only the recipients and the nominees, but also every person who chooses to devote their time to people with disability.
We need to break down the barriers in this country.
We need to educate Australians to stop the discrimination against people with disability.
Discrimination that is generally the result of ignorance rather than malice. 
You only have to look at Paralympic gold medallist Kurt Fearnley, who is here with us tonight, for proof of ability far exceeding disability.
Kurt is an Ambassador for these awards.
And what an Ambassador he is.
About seven weeks ago Kurt won the Boston Marathon.
Four weeks ago he won his fourth New York Marathon.
And less than a week ago Kurt conquered the Kokoda track.
He crawled the entire 96 kilometres.
I know from personal experience how difficult the Kokoda Track is.
It almost did me in.
So Kurt's achievement is nothing short of extraordinary - and Kurt, we salute you.
As finalists for the National Disability Awards, you have all played your part in educating Australians and you have done it with great commitment and passion.
I thank you all for the work you do in addressing the inadequacies in the Australian disability system.
To all the National Disability Awards finalists and nominees - I applaud you.
And to those who receive awards today - congratulations and keep up the fine work that is being recognised here today.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
I also acknowledge the excellent work of everyone involved with White Ribbon Day, particularly the White Ribbon Ambassadors here today, in raising the profile of the battle to end violence against women and children.
It's not often that a Prime Minister is asked to swear - in public.
But when it's for White Ribbon Day, I want to hear every man in this building swear out loud today, because we are swearing an oath; a commitment to end violence against women; to never excuse violence against women.
We must have zero tolerance when it comes to violence against women.
All Australian men must take responsibility for ending violence against women.
The statistics are horrific.
Over their lifetimes, almost one in five Australian women will be sexually assaulted.
Almost one in three will be physically assaulted.
Almost one in four children in Australia will witness violence against their mother or stepmother.
Less than one-third of victims will report it.
And the cost of this violence to the Australian economy has been estimated as $13.6 billion last financial year.
From impacts on health, on working life and other costs - in addition to the incalculable emotional and psychological harm.
That is why the Australian Government is emphatically committed to reducing violence against women.
In April, we received the Time for Action report from the National Council to Reduce Violence Against Women and Their Children.
And as an immediate response, the Australian Government has invested $42 million in initiatives to reduce this violence, including $26 million in measures such as Respectful Relationships programs for young people across the country.
And a social marketing campaign which is focused on changing the attitudes and behaviours that contribute to violence against women.
We have referred the Time for Action report to the Council of Australian Governments (COAG).
And my colleagues - the Attorney-General Robert McClelland and the Minister for Women, Tanya Plibersek - have been working hard with a cross-section of State and Territory Ministers on the next step of a National Plan to Reduce Violence against Women.
A draft of the Plan will come to COAG next month.
And it will be finalised next year.
Our Violence Against Women Advisory Group has held its first meeting.
We are assessing applications to run a second round of Respectful Relationship programs for young people.
And we have gone out to tender for the establishment of a 24 hour, 7 day a week national telephone and online crisis services for victims of violence.
We have also commissioned a survey on attitudes to violence against women - the first since 1995.
And today I can release the results of that survey.
The National Community Attitudes Towards Violence against Women Survey 2009 was conducted by VicHealth, in partnership with the Australian Institute of Criminology and the Social Research Centre.
10,000 Australians were surveyed: women and men in equal numbers.
I'm pleased to report that there has been a significant shift in the attitudes and beliefs Australians hold about violence against women.
This survey confirms that respect for all people is a fundamental Australian value, that the vast majority of Australians agree that relationships must be respectful and free of violence, and that Australians want to live in a community where all women can live free of violence.
98 per cent of respondents to this survey acknowledged that domestic violence is a crime, an increase from 93 per cent in 1995.
Very few people - in fact, only one in 20 - now believe that victims of sexual assault 'ask for it'. That's down from one in seven people in 1995.
But disappointingly, the survey shows that some Australians still hold attitudes which excuse or trivialise violence against women.
One quarter of people surveyed disagree with the statement that 'women rarely make false claims of being raped'.
One in five thinks that violence can be excused if the violent person later genuinely regrets what they have done.
And disturbingly, the proportion of people who think that women are as likely as men to commit domestic violence has more than doubled.
The statistics simply do not bear this out.
Data from the most recent Australian Bureau of Statistics Personal Safety Survey shows that for those women who had experienced physical assault in the past 12 months:
     * 31 per cent were attacked by a current or former male partner;
     * 28 per cent by a male family member or friend; and
     * 15 per cent by a male stranger.
For those men who had been physically assaulted in the same period, only four per cent were attacked by a current or former female partner.
65 per cent were attacked by male strangers.
Men are victims of violence but the violence they experience is much more likely to be at the hands of a male stranger than a female partner.
No violence is acceptable - not domestic violence, not sexual assault, not elder abuse, child abuse or neglect.
Teaching kids from day one about respectful relationships should reduce a range of violent behaviours.
We must do more to change attitudes and, even more importantly, change behaviour.
Our next steps will include our $17 million social marketing campaign which we will launch early next year.
We've come a long way in changing attitudes but - for the 1,000 women each day who are still victims of violence - this is no time for complacency.
At the launch of this year's White Ribbon Day I said I would encourage every honourable gentleman in the Australian Parliament to take this oath.
That night I swore the oath.
I applaud all the White Ribbon Day Ambassadors across Australia who swore this oath.
And I applaud the men who have come here today to swear the oath - every Aussie man should.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
It is a great honour to be part of The Shepherd Centre's 2009 Graduation and I thank Anthea and Michael for this opportunity. I must also say a big thank you to Aleisha and Lewis for their help in presenting the certificates to everyone - and congratulations to you Lewis on being named Graduate of the Year.
And well done to all of you on that fantastic song. I might get some of my friends at Parliament House to learn that one !
Thanks too to young Christa for these beautiful self-portraits. I remember Christa served me 'tea' when I was here in June, and a little birdy tells me that there was a bit of coaching going on to try to get her to call me Prime Minister instead of Kevin. I assure you, she is only following instructions - I told her to call me Kevin.
According to Mum Tricia, every time Christa sees me on TV she yells "there's Kevin", and I'm also advised she is now multi-lingual - she mutters under her breath in both English and Greek.
But I know that Tricia sits here today the very proud mum of a Shepherd Centre graduate. When Tricia was asked what the Shepherd Centre has meant to her for the last five years she said, very simply - "everything." So I understand that today is a very happy day, but also a day when you have to say goodbye to some people who have been a major part of your lives.
To all the staff, the graduates and all the parents and carers I offer my sincere congratulations.
To see the sense of pride and achievement the children have today is quite overwhelming. It is days like this that make the teachers, and the sponsors and donors, feel that their hard work and generosity is all worthwhile.
And days like this that vindicate Bruce Shepherd's tenacity in fighting for hearing-impaired children to be part of the hearing world.
Much is owed to Bruce and his late wife Annette and their unswerving belief in the benefits of Auditory-Verbal Therapy. Bruce said of Annette, and I quote, "We complemented each other. She got the ideas and I guess I made them work."
Dr Michael Brydon, who shared Bruce's belief in early intervention, described Bruce as "a hurdler of hurdles".
Michael recalled a conversation where he told Bruce about the group from the Royal Hospital for Women working on a shoestring budget to set up a pilot program for newborn screening. Michael told Bruce their greatest obstacle was an inability to purchase the actual equipment to carry out the screening.
But Michael said that in typical Bruce fashion he just replied: "Leave it to me, I'll fix that."
And fix it he did, by personally funding the equipment that allowed the very first trials of screening newborns at the Royal Hospital for Women - an unproven concept that Bruce Shepherd made happen, and that pilot program led the NSW Health Minister at the time, Craig Knowles, to introduce newborn screening in NSW.
The benefits of early diagnosis are now accepted.
So since my last visit to The Shepherd Centre in June this year, I have asked all states and territories to fast-track the introduction of neonatal hearing screening for all Australian newborns.
COAG has agreed that by the end of 2010 every child born in Australia will have access to screening for congenital hearing impairments. Each state and territory will be responsible for the delivery of the individual program. And a Neonatal Hearing Screening Working Group across Governments is working to guarantee a nationally consistent and comprehensive quality screening pathway and system.
I'm advised the Working Group has circulated the new draft national standards to stakeholders, and the Department of Health and Ageing is arranging a workshop this month to discuss the document.
One of the challenges is how to stop children from being lost in the system once they've been identified as having a hearing difficulty, so a national register will be established as part of the approach to universal neonatal screening. The register will be a central point for collection and management of all data, and stakeholders will be consulted on how best to set this up.
The Working Group will also take into account the need for families to be able to make informed decisions about the options available, the need for evidence-based information about approaches to communication and early intervention
The Senate has also referred the Inquiry into Hearing Health in Australia to the Senate Community Affairs References Committee, to report in February 2010.
When I attended the Newborn Hearing Symposium in August this year, which was hosted by Bruce's good friend Brendan Nelson, I said to the delegates that the Government understands this clearly: that diagnosis is just the beginning, not the end.
Universal neonatal hearing screening will complement the Government's existing Hearing Services Program. This program provides free hearing services, like assessment, rehabilitation, the fitting of hearing aids and maintenance, and speech processor upgrades for children with cochlear implants.
Overall, we'll invest about $349 million in the program this financial year - including about $18.7 million to provide services to almost 26,400 children. Last financial year, Medicare paid $4.6 million for cochlear implant insertion surgery and another $33.9 million for programming implant speech processors.
In addition, Australian Hearing, the Government's statutory authority, provided about $4 million in 2008-09 to replace, repair, maintain and upgrade cochlear speech processors for children.
When you hear the stories of parents discovering that their child has a hearing impairment, the initial feeling is, commonly, one of despair, not for themselves, but for the child they love who will face challenges that at times may seem insurmountable.
Every parent wants the best for their child. That was what drove Bruce and Annette to set up the Shepherd Centre.
The Shepherd Centre gives parents and carers the full picture. It gives hope, hope that their children will be able to fully participate in the hearing world, and so today - graduation day - is the culmination of a true team effort: the staff, the children, and the parents and carers.
For the majority of parents with a baby diagnosed with a hearing impairment, teaching them to speak is the ultimate goal. Graduation means you have achieved that goal, and that means the closing of a chapter, a chapter that at times, I'm sure, was testing and overwhelming.
But it is now time for children and parents alike to embark on an exciting new chapter. Congratulations to you all as you begin that next chapter - in a hearing, speaking world.


Today is the 4th of December 2009.
Exactly 18 months ago, on the 4th of June 2008, just across the other side of Sydney Harbour, I delivered a speech and put forward the idea of an Asia Pacific community.
In that first speech I said I wanted to begin a conversation about where we wanted our regional institutions to be in 2020.
I said that we should share our thoughts, our hopes and our dreams on what sort of community we needed to secure a bright future for the nations of the Asia Pacific. 
I said that our region needed to have a conversation about how to maximise the benefits of its dynamism, and to manage the challenges that its dynamism would also bring. 
In the intervening 18 months, we have come a fair way in that conversation.
The conversation began in earnest when Dick Woolcott began his regional consultations.
Judging from the metrics around his consultations, it was quite an intense start to the conversation: 21 countries, 85 days, and discussions with more than 300 individuals, including more than 30 ministers and eight heads of state or heads of government.
The conversation continued with the keynote address I gave to the Shangri-la dialogue in Singapore, where I set out in more detail my case for why we needed this conversation and the direction we needed to head for by 2020. 
A new phase in the conversation was reached when I outlined my vision of an APc to the leaders of the East Asia Summit in October and then to APEC leaders in November. 
Those conversations signified the considerable interest in the APc at Leaders level, and enriched my own appreciation of what was wanted by other leaders. 
So, after 18 months, I am pleased that the countries of the region are increasingly comfortable about the fact that a conversation about the future of our regions is both useful and increasingly necessary.
Our region has been well served to date by the institutions we have all created in the past:
     * starting with the great work of ASEAN
     * through APEC
     * then the ARF
     * and now the EAS
     * even ASEM.
Each of these institutions has evolved to meet changing needs - of which ASEAN's evolution in terms of membership and mandate is the most outstanding example.
But the fact is that 35 years after the end of war in Indo-China, 30 years after the revolution in Chinese politics, economics and foreign policy, and 20 years since the end of the Cold War, our region, the Asia Pacific region, is still without a regional institution with wide membership and a wide mandate to deal with the breadth and depth of political, security, economic and environmental challenges we will face for in the 21st century - the century of the Asia Pacific.
Which is why an informed regional conversation about our regional future (in the absence of any particular crisis) is good in itself.
So today, you are about to embark on the next stage in the conversation. 
So can I first say to all of you that I am delighted you are here.
Your contributions, your individual engagement and your commitment will make this conference a success.
The fact that you come from so many different countries, and sectors - from government, from academia, from think tanks, from the media - with so many different interests in the APc will bring a new level of depth and vitality to the deliberations and the discussions.
And when it is all over, I look forward to reading the considered deliberations of this uniquely qualified group of individuals about where we are, where we need to go, and how we might consider getting there. 
For me, there are three key messages that emerge about our region and its future. 
First, it is dynamic. 
In terms of scale, the countries of the region represent over half of global production and close to half of world trade. 
They contain 60 per cent of the world's population.
They account for around 70 per cent of global carbon emissions. 
Even in a time of global downturn, the Asia Pacific region is growing fast.
Key economies like China, with expected growth of 8.5 per cent this year, and India, with expected growth this year of 5.4 per cent, are leading the way.
Its dynamism is such that our region is the driver of global growth. 
The Asia-Pacific region will account for 75 per cent of global economic growth next year.
But its dynamism is not just economic. 
As economies grow, defence spending rises - and our region already had many of the largest standing armies in the world.
Our region is rapidly becoming the centre of global economic and strategic weight - driven by a rising China, a rising India, and long-standing powerhouses such as Japan and the continuing superpower that it is the United States. 
In this context, great powers such as Russia also have an important role.
Second, our region is becoming infinitely more connected. 
Some of this increasing connectedness follows from the impact of globalisation, and the people flows, the financial flows and the information technology platforms that power the globalisation process. 
Some of it follows from our own deliberate actions to increase bilateral and multilateral interaction and to foster the inter-connectedness that now characterises our region. 
APEC, for example, has been very successful in promoting trade between our economies. 
On average, two-thirds of APEC member economies trade is now with other APEC members.
The key strategic implication of this compounding inter-connectedness is that what happens in one country in the 
Asia Pacific is more likely than ever before to affect other countries.
Both for good.
And for ill.
In fact in this Asia Pacific region we are experiencing, with perhaps even greater intensity, this double impact of the wider globalisation process.
Because of the growing density of regional enmeshment, we are all now profoundly impacted by the actions of each other.
If China's economic growth was to collapse tomorrow, the impact for all of us would be great indeed.
Conversely, China's continuing economic growth is a major plus for us all in the current global recession.
Similarly, China, India and the United States - all members of the wider region - will profoundly shape the future of climate change for all our countries and beyond.
Furthermore, if any one of us was to drop the ball on the proper management of internationally communicable diseases, we are all affected because of the density of our regional people flows.
So in order to enhance the positive dimensions of growing regional inter-connectedness, and to manage any negative impacts, robust pan-regional institutions become more important, not less.
Third, our region faces challenges, and is likely to face more of them in the future. 
I am an avowed optimist about our region - I believe it has the dynamism and trajectory to make the Asia-Pacific century truly pacific. 
But as a region, we face a number of emerging challenges.
First, we need to develop a more sustainable and balanced model for the region's growth that does not rely solely on exports and avoids creating a further round of destabilising economic imbalances.
Second, our region has large populations and limited resources - creating the potential for competition for scarce resources - oil and gas, water and food. 
Third, the region has unresolved border disputes, some of which traverse fields of substantial natural resources. 
It has large and growing militaries - and five countries with nuclear weapons.
Our region still has a number of regional flashpoints, such as the DPRK, and we face a substantial challenge in acting on the threat of WMD proliferation.
Fourth, our region also has its share of non-traditional security threats - from terrorism, to transnational crime including illegal people movements. 
Fifth, I have already referred to the pan-regional and pan-global threat of climate change, which if we fail to act will have devastating consequences for all our countries - economic, environmental, human security and ultimately strategic.
Finally, let us also acknowledge a fundamental strategic fact - our region lies at the confluence of the interests of five major powers - the United States, China, India, Russia and Japan.
These major powers live in harmony today.
But history should caution us, not to assume that peace, harmony and concord are somehow pre-determined and therefore inevitable for our region.
A cursory examination of the 19th and 20th century history of the European great powers suggests we should be cautious about any such assumption.
The truth is, common security has to be crafted by national states driven by a common purpose.
And here, once again, is where the role of regional institution building is so important.
For example, here in the Asia-Pacific is where the template for the US-China relationship will be forged, and where their interests - competitive and complementary - will need to be managed, harmonised and reconciled. 
So far, the United States and China have managed this well on a largely bilateral basis.
It may be that in the future this is supplemented by the emerging norms of regional institution building. 
If the range of challenges I have outlined were static, I would be supremely confident that we could manage them. 
But the truth is they are not static, they are profoundly dynamic and if not handled skilfully, potentially destabilising.
The enduring lesson of history is that the only constant in international relations is change. 
And in our region, with its inherent power, its internal diversity and its dynamism, the prospects for rapid change are great. 
In a region that is dynamic and increasingly inter-connected, and which already has its share of challenges, we need increasingly to manage our futures together. 
Globally, this is the lesson of the G20's response to the global financial crisis, as together we stared into the global abyss and decided to act in the global good.
Globally, this is also the lesson of climate change although it is still uncertain what will be produced at Copenhagen.
We need therefore, in our own region, to be alert to where our trajectories are leading us, to points of friction that may be ahead, and to ways that we can cooperate more closely for our shared interests. 
In short, we need to plan - we need to plan with each other, rather than against each other as has often been the custom in times past.
We cannot simply allow our region to drift in the face of the challenges ahead.
We need actively to shape our regional future.
We all have an interest in finding the best possible mechanism to avoid strategic friction, to maximise strategic stability and to enhance the depth and breadth of our political and economic engagement with each other - and the regional norms that underpin that engagement.
The key question for this conference, and behind my proposal for an Asia-Pacific Community, is how do we best manage our region's increasing dynamism, our increasing inter-dependency and the common challenges we face?
What is the best mechanism to address the full spectrum of challenges facing the region: economic, political and strategic?
How do we ensure that our current outward-looking regionalism continues as the bed-rock of Asia-Pacific integration?
How do we foster a deeper regional culture of cooperation and entrench the habits of consultation and so avoid any future conflict?
How do we craft integrated solutions to the complex and multi-faceted problems we face?
It cannot just be assumed this will occur naturally. 
Nor do I imagine that it will be easy or fast. 
But we are assisted by the fact that we have been collectively building our regional community for decades - whether through ASEAN and its off-shoots, APEC, the ARF and a whole host of connections that these great institutions have so effectively fostered.
But it is my view that we can do so much more together across our wider region as we seek to plan together for the century ahead. 
So what sort of Asia-Pacific community do we see as being required?
Quite deliberately, I have given no complete answer to this question in the eighteen months of our conversation. 
We believe that we have asked a good set of questions, but we do not claim to have all of the answers. 
We claim no monopoly of wisdom on these questions which is why I have valued the wise counsel of senior 
regional statesmen such as Lee Kuan Yew, Goh Chok Tong, Lee Hsien Loong, President Yudhoyono and Prime Minister Najib.
Our ambition in Australia has been to open paths for dialogue rather than to close them off, to listen as much as to speak, to encourage conversation rather than seek to dominate it.
After all, if we are in the business of fashioning a new collaborative institution, the process of institution-building itself must be collaborative.
From our perspective, the conversation of the last 18 months has been a successful start that will become in time a more focused dialogue. 
There has been no shortage of commentary on our proposal.
Some critical.
Some supportive.
But all, in my view, welcome.
The regional discussion on institution building has also been enhanced by the very useful contribution of Prime Minister Hatoyama of Japan on the future of our region. 
This conference's deliberations are designed as a further demonstration of Australia's keenness to learn as much from you on your countries' aspirations for our region's future.
As well as offering some perspectives of our own.
First, an APc must engage all key countries that make up our region. 
It should include all the major powers - including the United States, which would need to be a member of any future Asia Pacific community, if it was to embrace the totality of our region's future.
It should also embrace the region's core grouping, ASEAN. 
As I have said before, ASEAN, given its positive history and its contribution for the future, should be very much at the core of any future Asia Pacific community.
Second, an Asia Pacific community must be able to traverse all of the major questions that affect our region - political, economic, and strategic. 
The challenges and opportunities that affect our futures are increasingly indivisible. 
If they ever existed, the days when problems or opportunities could be neatly compartmentalised as political, or economic or strategic, have gone. 
The world, and our region certainly, are much more complicated, connected and integrated than that. 
Take the regional economic crisis of the late 1990s, for example. 
What began as a banking crisis in one country quickly became an economic crisis in others. 
And from an economic crisis, it morphed into a social and employment crisis. 
For some, it developed into a political crisis. 
We need a mechanism that draws these threads together, and allows us to act on all fronts, in an integrated way, where possible anticipating developments rather than simply reacting to crises - and doing so with an increasing sense of regional community. 
We can no longer afford to have the interests of the region dealt with in separate silos.
It might have worked for the 20th century.
But it does not work in the joined up world of the 21st century.
Third, an Asia Pacific community must shape the habits of transparency, trust and foster the instinct of cooperation. 
The community we seek must, from its outset, embrace the values that will be essential for our region's strong future. 
It must operate as a vehicle for openness about our prospects, our intentions and our challenges. 
In doing so, we must be open with each other. 
Fourth, an Asia Pacific community must meet at leaders' level. 
Only leaders can traverse the breadth of fields across which our opportunities and challenges will be played out. 
Only leaders can fully connect the economic and strategic, the environmental and the political. 
Only leaders can bring the strategic dimension to thinking that will be needed to manage the challenges that are likely to confront us. 
As Dick Woolcott found during his consultations, there is widespread recognition that none of our existing regional bodies, as currently configured, meets all these criteria.. 
There is no institution that has either the membership or the mandate to address the full spectrum of challenges facing the region: economic, political, strategic and environmental.
We should also take this opportunity to consider what an APc should not be. 
Other regions can provide us with useful models, but our region is unique. 
It is clear to me that, unlike the EU, we do not need a supra-national decision making structure. 
It is equally clear to me that we do not need an additional institution to add to the many which already populate the region's architecture. 
We certainly cannot ask the leaders of the region to add a further meeting to their already heavy schedules. 
Instead, we need to begin to discuss how to evolve an Asia-Pacific region from our existing regional institutions - rather than try to start completely afresh - particularly given the excellent work already done by our wider pan-regional institutions and their in-built and demonstrated capacity to adapt to changing needs.
Let us therefore consider together where we could go from here for the future.
I would like to lay out some options for you to consider, in the current jargon, the 'glide paths' that we could use.
We can of course, do nothing - but that would expose us to the weaknesses that have been identified in our current architecture.
Another approach (as noted above) would be to build entirely new institutions from the ground up - in other words we could add a new body purpose-built to be able to manage the emerging challenges we have identified.
But there was a clear feeling during Dick Woolcott's consultations that adding to the number of meetings that leaders around the region have to attend, or adding to the already long list of regional meetings for officials is not the preferred way forward.
The alternative, or third way, would be to build an APc using some of the architecture that the region already has at hand - the key elements of which are APEC, EAS and the ARF.
Could APEC evolve, over time, to meet the needs of an APc?
To do so, it would need to take on a more defined security mandate.
And of course it would need to bring in India - a nation that will be a key player in the future of our region in the decades ahead.
Alternatively, is the East Asia Summit the natural building block for the architecture we seek?
Perhaps the East Asia Summit - a still evolving body - could expand and develop to take on a broader role.
Its membership would need to increase to include other key players.
President Obama's recent remarks that that America will look to deepen its engagement with the EAS could be part of a move in this direction.
Another alternative would be to look at somehow bringing the key existing bodies - APEC and EAS - together, which would bring with it the benefit of a single leaders meeting or cluster of meetings.
This could be extended - by merging the wider range of regional bodies to fuse together the political, economic and security agendas that confront our region.
The ASEAN Regional Forum was established specifically to deal with security challenges.
It filled an obvious void in the region.
But I would argue that its membership is too large to conceive of the ARF becoming established at leaders' level.
I recognise that there will be different views about these possible "glide paths" to a future regional architecture.
But I hope they offer a useful platform for your thinking. 
Let me explain what I hope the role of this conference will be. 
At the most fundamental level, this conference will continue the conversation that was begun eighteen months ago. 
The conference will hear contrasting, and probably opposing, points of view. 
That is a good thing. 
I welcome the debate that the diversity of the group participating here will bring. 
Without that debate, we cannot find the synthesis that we need. 
But I hope that you will be able to settle on some ideas, some principles that will guide our way forward. 
That is my challenge to you over the next day and a half.
You are the experts on foreign policy and regional organisations from around our region and beyond.
You have gathered here for a conference with a clear purpose.
Your mission - led by Dick Woolcott, Michael Wesley and Madame Ninh - is to answer some key questions.
First, what do we want?
Second, how might we get there?
I am not actually expecting the final answers by Saturday lunch time.
But I do expect to that at the end of this conference we will have some notion of what we want to do for the future of our region.
I also hope that you will find a mechanism to continue the conversation in a constructive way. 
It is a major task.
I believe it is an important and urgent task.
And look forward to receiving the chairpersons' report on your deliberations and on the most constructive way forward.
That is why we have gathered you - with all the experience and expertise that you bring - to discuss, debate and describe the future of our region, so that we might all work together to shape the future to deliver stability, security and prosperity for all our peoples and all our nations in what will become the century of the Asia Pacific.


I am delighted to be here today at this important forum, joining both those gathered here in person, and those online.
Thank you to Paul Twomey for his warm introduction, and my thanks to Stephen Conroy for organising this event and for all those who have assisted.
Stephen and others have brought together people with both vision and the capacity to turn vision into reality - dreamers and experts, pragmatists and digital warriors.
Earlier this year the Australian Government made a historic commitment to the future of broadband, jobs and the future of the Australian economy, the commitment to build the National Broadband Network.
We are committed to building the NBN because we believe broadband is essential to building a stronger Australia - to the jobs and the economy of the future.
As I said in launching our plan for the NBN, broadband is the infrastructure of the 21st century. Just as railway tracks laid the future for the 19th century, and electricity grids and highways laid the future in the 20th century, so broadband is the core infrastructure of the new century.
It is critical if Australia is to compete successfully in the global digital economy and create the jobs and industries of the future. It is also essential for many of the technologies that will help us reduce carbon emissions, improve health services, create a world class education system, and improve opportunities for all Australians no matter where they live.
High speed broadband is, in short, at the heart of building a stronger, fairer Australia ready for the challenges of the 21st century.
That is why the Government has taken the step of establishing the NBN Co.
The reality is that Australia's current broadband infrastructure is not up to scratch. Slow broadband is holding our nation back:
     * Average broadband speeds in Australia are 40 times slower than the world leader, Japan.
     * Out of 30 leading countries, we are behind all but three countries. We're behind Turkey. We're behind the Slovak Republic.
     * Australians want high-speed broadband, but we are in the bottom half of OECD countries for broadband take-up (16 out of 30 in 2008).
Before the Government came to office two years ago, we had seen a series of failed promises for better broadband. 18 plans in a period of 12 years, while Australia fell behind.
When the Government came to office, we began the work to assess how we can best deliver a national broadband network, and earlier this year, I announced that the Australian Government will be investing up to $43 billion over eight years to build and operate a National Broadband Network, delivering world leading super-fast broadband to all Australian homes and businesses.
As I said at the time, this is like the building of the Snowy River scheme, the Sydney Harbour Bridge, and the national highway network. It is an historic act of nation building, and it demonstrates our great confidence in Australia's future - future industries, future jobs and future prosperity.
Delivering the NBN is a massive national task, and we are delighted to have someone with Mike Quigley's experience leading the NBN. His work is critically important nation-building work, because delivering high speed broadband to all Australians requires national leadership from the government, and the best technical and commercial leadership from the business community.
History teaches us the need for national leadership on major nation-building infrastructure - and that is why the Government is delivering the NBN.
The work has already begun. We began laying down the first 'track' of the NBN in Tasmania in July this year. It marked an historic milestone in our nation building calendar.
As I said at the time, though it was a small beginning this has the potential to transform our economy, and the potential to transform many aspects of our lives.
If you are living in the bush and you need to see a doctor without leaving your house -- fast broadband is the answer.
If you live in Brisbane and you want to talk regularly face-to-face with a friend or loved one in London - fast broadband is the answer.
If you are running a business in Broome that needs to operate 24 hours, seven days a week - fast broadband is the answer.
If you are a teacher in Geelong wanting to bring the world to the classroom -- fast broadband is the answer.
And if you are a small business in Campbelltown wanting to tender for a government contract and meet the deadline - fast broadband is the answer.
Faster broadband through the NBN will see optical fibre to homes, schools and businesses deliver superfast speeds of 100 megabits per second - 50 times faster than what most people use now. In conjunction with next generation wireless and satellite technologies we will make sure every household, school and business has access to fast broadband.
This will revolutionise teaching in our classrooms, revolutionise health care in our medical centres and our hospitals and will plug our nation into the global economy. It will link together communities and people all across Australia, so that Australians in regional areas are not left out. Significantly it has the potential to help Australia address many of the key challenges of the future, challenges such as the need to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, dealing with the consequences of an ageing population and arresting the trend towards increased levels of congestion in our major cities.
In other words, our national broadband policy is not about communications policy. It is about health policy; education policy; transport policy; and the whole way that governments meet the needs of our people.
Consider the role of the NBN in tackling climate change: it has been estimated that broadband can help reduce Australia's annual emissions of greenhouse gases by five per cent.
For example, video conferencing can remove the need to travel for face-to-face meetings. The Australian division of Cisco claims that it achieved a 16 per cent reduction in air travel in a single year since adopting videoconferencing and other telepresence facilities.
In 2008 Microsoft Australia saved $18,000 on a single quarterly management meeting of 130 people using its videoconferencing products Live Meeting and Roundtable.
In February 2009, the Australian Government announced that telepresence technology would be deployed across 20 Australian Government and state government locations for use in intergovernmental meetings such as Ministerial Councils. This will lower government travel costs and associated greenhouse emissions by reducing the need for face-to-face meetings.
Another example of the benefits is smart meters. Widespread deployment of smart meters, combined with in-home displays has the potential to improve operational efficiency and significantly reduce the amount of energy used by Australian households. In addition, studies show that greater consumer awareness of energy consumption assists in reducing greenhouse gas emissions.
Smart meters demonstrate the benefits of having a price for energy and an ability for households to be able to manage their energy usage.
Finally, smart grids will see the electricity transmission and distribution network equipped with digital sensors and remote controls; integration of renewable energy sources such as solar and wind; and smart meters communicating information to and from the household. Such a self-aware energy network will enable greater energy efficiency, reduced emissions and better utilisation of renewable energy sources such as solar.
In all these examples it demonstrates the benefits of having both information networks and market signals to help the Australian economy adjust to lower levels of carbon emissions. It is why we need a National Broadband Network - to assist in communicating vast amounts of information.
And it is why we need a price on carbon - that's why we need a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme. Together, the NBN and CPRS are critical to Australia's efforts to address climate change.
The NBN will also have enormous long-term productivity benefits. Access Economics estimates that across all key services - energy, water, health and transport - the adoption of smart technologies and the roll-out of high-speed broadband could add 70,000 jobs to the Australian economy, and add 1.5 per cent to Australia's GDP within a few years.
This is why, as we emerge from the global financial crisis, it is absolutely critical that we get on with the job and build our critical infrastructure, and that is what we intend to do.
We recognise that long-term infrastructure investments are an essential part of driving productivity and securing prosperity in the years to come. Investments in education and innovation and infrastructure are critical for the nation's long-term productivity growth.
Investment in broadband infrastructure will boost short-term employment opportunities while creating a foundation for our future economy.
     * It will create a platform for future innovation.
     * It will drive new business efficiencies.
     * It will support new smart infrastructure.
     * It will open new trade opportunities.
     * It will contribute to productivity growth across the economy.
Building a national high speed broadband network will create jobs now, and into the future: 25,000 jobs every year, on average, during the rollout of the network. At its peak, the rollout will support 37,000 jobs.
High speed broadband will also generate additional economic activity. The NBN is expected to generate additional economic activity worth some $37 billion over the life of the project - an additional quarter per cent of GDP every year for the life of the project.
Most importantly, high speed broadband, once built, has the potential to underpin innovation and job creation across every part of our economy. The former Commonwealth Department of Communications estimated that innovation from information and communications technology is the single biggest driver of business productivity, driving 78 per cent of productivity gains in service businesses and 85 per cent in manufacturing businesses.
Broadband allows the rapid transfer of information and saves business time and money and reduces paperwork. Online marketing and sales means access to global markets of consumers without the traditional costs of expansion, and it creates new opportunities for new businesses developing new broadband applications.
The Australian business community increasingly recognises the importance of high speed broadband to our future. A survey by the Australian Industry Group last year reported overwhelming support from business for the National Broadband Network, with more than 85 per cent of CEOs saying that internet access was highly important to their business. More than 93 per cent said the internet was driving productivity and 70 per cent said high-speed broadband created a strategic advantage.
Broadband is also having a transformative effect on the delivery of services and interaction with government, with major benefits to communities across the country.
Australia's population is set to increase to 35 million people over the next 40 years. Ubiquitous broadband, through the NBN, will reduce the pressure on our current population centres by making regional communities both attractive and viable - even the most remote communities.
Consider the experience of the Yorke Peninsula - with a population of just over 11,000 people and a higher than average proportion of people aged over 50. 35 per cent of those employed are primarily in agriculture.
In 2005, broadband arrived on the Yorke Peninsula. In 2008, a report commissioned by the South Australian Government estimated total economic benefits of $21.4 million to the Yorke Peninsula region from the broadband rollout.
Local businesses are now collaborating and trading with partners in distant locations, while doctors are using broadband to transfer medical files and access records. That is why it can never be good enough just to roll out high-speed broadband to the suburbs of our major cities - we must adopt a national approach, as we have done with the plan for the NBN.
This year's Budget recognised the importance of keeping our regional communities connected. We established a $60 million Digital Regions Initiative for digital education, health and emergency services projects in regional, rural and remote communities.
Today I am pleased to announce the first seven successful Digital Regions Initiative projects - a $26.5 million investment that will benefit regional communities across Australia.
In South Australia, we will invest $2.3 million in Ambulance Mobile Connect. Under this scheme, South Australian Ambulance Service vehicles will be equipped with mobile computing terminals connected to a variety of emergency response and medical information systems via a high speed mobile broadband network.
This will give paramedics real-time access to details of an emergency incident and critical patient information. It will also provide a variety of information systems that will improve ambulance response times and support the delivery of clinical care by paramedics.
In the Northern Territory, we will invest $7 million for Health e-Towns to deliver improvements in health and education outcomes for 17 remote towns. This investment will support the development of local networks and ICT enabled health, education and training services.
The health services delivered under this proposal will extend clinical consulting and diagnostic services through new e-health solutions. This project is estimated to reach approximately 30,000 predominantly Indigenous users across the Northern Territory.
In North East Victoria, we will invest $500,000 in Bushfire Spotting and Response technologies. Using remote cameras, telemetry and video conferencing devices connected by a wireless network, this project will help reduce the risks posed by bushfires through enhanced fire detection, management and response capability. Importantly, this proposal is aligned with the priorities identified as a result of the Victorian Bushfires Royal Commission.
The Government will also partner with Hunter New England Health by investing $5 million in Chronic Disease Management systems to provide more effective and equitable health care for consumers in remote and regional areas. These systems will increase the coverage of facility based telehealth services and link chronic disease sufferers in their homes to monitoring, educational and support services. This project will also provide increased network capacity services to isolated sites and improve the reporting and delivery of medical imaging tests.
In Western Australia, we will invest $2.8 million in bushfire prediction technology. This will provide families, communities, organisations and emergency services agencies in rural, regional and remote Australia with bushfire alerts (via SMS and email), access to bushfire simulation maps, fire fighting technique testing, a bushfire planning tool, and the improvement of bushfire resilient infrastructure.
In Tasmania, we will invest $4.9 million in the Connected - Any Student, Any School project. This will enable Tasmanian schools to use technologies to offer exciting and innovative personalised learning opportunities - using practical, hands on and local, national and global e-learning programs and services. In the short term, the focus will be on services in the NBN pilot towns of Scottsdale and Smithton, while in the longer term services will be delivered across the whole of Tasmania as the NBN is deployed.
And finally, I am pleased to announce a $4 million investment to the CDM-Net health project, which stretches across different states. It will assist health practitioners, hospitals, and allied health workers to develop and manage a chronic disease care plan for patients. This project will be led by Barwon Health in Victoria and is very well supported nationally, including by the key partner of Queensland Health.
These are all worthy projects that will co-fund digitally enabled applications to improve services in the key sectors of health, education and emergency services in regional, rural and remote communities across Australia in partnership with state, territory and local governments.
I know some communities are already asking when the NBN will reach them. I am pleased today to be able to report important progress on the NBN.
The NBN Co has been established to build and operate the network.
We have begun a detailed implementation study by a consortium of McKinsey and KPMG to provide information on the optimal market structure and competition regime, access models, technology impacts on policy issues and funding arrangements.
In Tasmania construction on the rollout has begun and the first 10 Tasmanian communities to receive superfast broadband have been announced.
Activities are also beginning on the mainland.
Last week, the Government announced Nextgen Networks had been selected to roll out almost 6,000km of new fibre optic backbone links.
As part of its broader investment in the National Broadband Network, the Government will invest $250 million in this new infrastructure that will connect over 100 regional communities and ultimately benefit over 395,000 people across five states and the Northern Territory.
These links will encourage more competition and better broadband services across regional Australia, and serve as important building blocks to support the requirements of the National Broadband Network. We have also introduced legislation to deliver structural reform for the telecommunications industry so that it is more competitive and innovative, and has stronger protections for consumers.
The Government recognises that the digital future requires change in the way that government communicates with Australian citizens and delivers services across the country. That is why we established the Government 2.0 Taskforce to investigate and report on how we can use information technology to strengthen the relationship between government and the Australian public.
While the Internet is the citizen's most common point of contact with government, it is still largely passive contact - people seeking information or filling in forms. The taskforce has been examining the larger potential of the Internet to help departments and officials directly hear the views and ideas of citizens, to personalise public services, and to allow for ongoing review and improvement of public services.
A competition which the Government 2.0 Taskforce hosted last month invited exponents of "data mash-ups" to transform government information into data bases that could benefit citizens. From this government data, 80 mash-ups were created in just two weeks.
The competition winner, LobbyLens, combined a range of business and electoral data to produce visual representations of links between government organisations, lobbyists and businesses.
Another entry, In their Honour - Mapping Anzac Graves, will, once it is fully developed, help Australians find the burial places of relatives who died in overseas conflicts.
Another entry created a service to report damaged amenities and public facilities to local governments around Australia. The service is known - in a classic case of public service jargon - as It's Buggered Mate.
And it points to a future in which information not only keeps government accountable, it can be fed back to government to help it deliver better services.
Governments and the public service should not fear the digital revolution, but welcome it. That is why my own website is now providing the opportunity for Australians to post comments to my blog and participate virtually in real time discussion directly with me through the PM's Web Chat.
Since the website's relaunch on 15 July this year, we've run four online forums gathering over 1,500 comments, and through a variety of email and twitter updates.
I have also hosted two live web chats with around 45 members of the community. The first web chat on Climate Change was held on 10 August, the second web chat for Young Australians was held on 22 October. These events are the first time an Australian Prime Minister has hosted live, real-time online engagement, and they are just the start.
Like Community Cabinet, they are part of the Government's commitment to a more accessible, open and transparent way of governing.
Our Nation Building - Economic Stimulus Plan website which went live on 25 March this year set a new benchmark for transparency and interactivity by Government. The website provides information and regular updates on all components of the $42 billion Economic Stimulus Package.
The unique My Community interactive Google map allows visitors to track about 50,000 approved projects across the nation. Users can search by suburb, town or postcode to see what projects are underway in their community, across all elements of the Economic Stimulus Plan. As of 12 November, the website had attracted 279,405 unique visits and more than 1.1 million total page views.
The yourHealth website is another Australian Government innovation that provides a wide range of ways for the community to contribute to the national health reform conversation. Since its launch on 27 July this year, yourHealth.gov.au has attracted more than 150,000 visitors and has received more than 1,150 submissions from the community, and its video submission system is an Australian Government first. It provides an alternative to a written submission by allowing the community to film their views and submit them online as a movie.
To date, 78 videos have been published, featuring a wide range of personal reflections and experiences of the health system. This new website allows the Government to listen to the community and lets community members explore, review and respond to comments from other community members, a process which will be further improved with the NBN.
As part of our investment in the NBN, the Government has announced an $80 million Rural and Regional National Broadband Network Initiative. Australia has one of the lowest population densities on the planet and this initiative is designed to ensure digital inclusion across rural and remote areas through three measures:
     * expansion of the ABC's Local Regional Broadband Hubs;
     * boosting funding to the Digital Regions Initiative to encourage innovative projects in regional, rural and remote communities; and
     * establishing a network of Rural NBN Coordinators to help drive broadband take-up and use in regional Australia.
Beyond the NBN, we are continuing to build digital confidence through related government programs and initiatives. Let me mention just a few.
As part of the Super Science initiative, we are funding ICT infrastructure for research organisations.
To address global challenges, such as climate change, we are funding the development of Smart Grid, Smart City in partnership with the energy sector. This demonstration project will deliver a fully integrated, commercial-scale smart grid and will inform the business case for broader industry investment in smart grids in Australia.
As part of the Digital Education Revolution, we have created a National Secondary School Computer Fund to provide new or upgraded ICT for secondary students in Years 9 to 12.
In April this year, we announced funding for the Vocational Education Broadband Network to allow the Tertiary and Further Education sector to access a high quality broadband network tailored to their specific requirements.
The importance of e-Health is recognised around the world as an opportunity to fundamentally reshape and improve health service delivery. The National E-Health Transition Authority was established by the Australian Government and state and territory governments to progress e-Health in Australia.
As business analysts Deloitte reported in September this year, the NBN has the potential to rival the impact of other technology milestones such as the widespread adoption of personal computers in the 1980s and the mass market adoption of mobile phones during the 1990s and 2000s, and as Deloitte's report says, the wider business community should be starting now to plan for the impact of the NBN on 'traditional' operations - which brings me to the purpose of the NBN forum for today and tomorrow.
The challenge at this forum is to help map out the applications, services and business models which will thrive in this new high-speed broadband environment in Australia. It is to ask the question 'what is possible?', to identify the next steps to maximise the growth of Australia's digital economy, and specifically, to identify what measures need to be undertaken by governments, business and community participants, and how do we make sure that all Australians can benefit from the potential of high-speed broadband - so that we use this technology to build a fairer Australia
We need to hear ideas across all the Forum streams - Smart Infrastructure, e-Health, Digital Education, e-Business and e-Community. These are the content, service and application streams with the greatest need and immediate potential for productivity and social benefit.
With the National Broadband Network, we are literally building our nation's future.
The Government is working to deploy smart technologies, promote digital inclusion and review Australia's regulatory framework to support and exploit the opportunities born of the digital revolution and all that will follow.
With these commitments, it then turns to industry to take the lead to ensure that Australia realises the full potential of the digital economy. Your task at this forum is to identify the first level of applications, services and business models and the steps required to make them happen.
Today marks the beginning of a nation-wide conversation of how we turn the digital vision to reality.
We have never pretended this mammoth project is easy. We need your input, your support and your vision. This is important work and I look forward to the results of the time you spend together. 


This is an historic day for the Australian automotive industry.
This first hybrid car produced in Australia, for Australians, and by Australians- you should be proud of what you're doing here, this day, for your country.
On top of that, this is an achievement of which all Australians should be proud. It's one of those days when we should be saying "Oh what a feeling, Australia!"
This is a great day for the country.
Just as the nation welcomed the first all-Australian Holden car in 1948 with Ben Chifley there for the first ride, sixty years later, all Australians should welcome the first Australian hybrid car as well. I place you on notice. I am down to drive this first car once it comes off the assembly line. My staff are nervous.
I have not been allowed to drive a car for two years - Occupational Health and Safety Standards should be made ready. Clear a path for the PM behind the wheel.
This is the beginning of a whole new era in Australian motoring.
Australia is one of only about 16 countries around the world to design, engineer and build a car from scratch. That's an important achievement for our nation.
And today Australia joins only four other countries that can produce a Toyota hybrid car.
The Toyota hybrid Camry will offer Australians the choice of a fuel-efficient, low emissions vehicle that is produced right here in Australia.
Compared with standard vehicles, it will use about 30% less petrol, and, critically, produce about 30% less carbon emissions.
The hybrid Camry is good for motorists, it's good for the economy, it's good for jobs, and it's good for action on climate change. Well done Toyota.
As we speak, the Governments of the world are gathering together in Copenhagen, in Denmark, to work towards an international agreement to tackle climate change - reducing carbon emissions is a huge challenge for us all. Every country, every industry, every person working together.
And the transport sector, which contributes 14% of Australia's total carbon emissions, must play its part if we are going to cool the planet in the future.
And today we see the automotive industry here in Australia playing its part, beginning the transition to a lower carbon economy.
And that transition means new jobs, new skills, new opportunities for this great Australian industry.
The Toyota hybrid Camry is an important step in Australia's ability to achieve our domestic emissions targets, and to reduce the impact of climate change.
It's an important practical step towards Australia's lower carbon future.
The Australian Government is pleased to support the production of the Toyota hybrid Camry in Australia in partnership with the Victorian Government.
It's good for the environment, critical for supporting jobs in the automotive sector- jobs which have disappeared around the world in the automotive sector because of the global economic recession and the global financial crisis.
But here in Australia we have worked together to keep these jobs, and I congratulate Toyota for their part in that vision.
Production of the hybrid Camry is expected to inject around $90 million into the Victorian and South Australian automotive parts industries, and will create new jobs at Toyota's suppliers.
More than 50 hybrid-unique parts have been sourced from local suppliers.
This great industry is worth $7 billion a year. 4,500 jobs at Toyota.
60,000 jobs directly in the automotive industry.
200,000 jobs indirectly, in related industries.
On the day I became leader of the Australian Labor Party, three years ago, I said this: "I don't want to be Prime Minister of a country that doesn't make things anymore".
My view has not changed.
This country will continue to make things in the future- and that includes making world-class motor vehicles.
That's why we put in place a 13 year, $6.2 billion New Car Plan for a Greener Future.
It's what we discussed with Toyota and their global leadership in Nagoya last year- how we could work together on projects like this one here that we are launching today.
It gives the industry the certainty that it needs and the incentives that it needs to innovate for the future.
The centrepiece of this plan is a $1.3 billion Green Car Innovation Fund.
The first grant from that $1.3 billion Australian Government Fund was awarded to this project that we are here to celebrate today, and I'm proud to be part of the success of Toyota with this project.
Can I also say, I congratulate the Industry Minister, Kim Carr.
Kim Carr, a passionate Victorian, a passionate believer in Australian manufacturing, and a passionate supporter of the automotive industry- congratulations Kim, were it not for your work, this would not have happened.
The other critical partner has of course been Toyota itself.
And the hard work of its management team, its world class engineering, which I have seen in Nagoya upfront, and also the work of unions and workers in making this deal effective on the ground.
I'd like specifically to acknowledge the unique contribution of Ian Jones, the Vehicle Division Secretary of the AMWU, for his hard work in supporting workers at Toyota and across the industry in recent times. Congratulations Ian, on a job well done.
It's been a tough time for the automotive industry globally, and here in Australia.
Car sales around the world have declined, and they've declined in Australia too.
It's easy to say that the industry's time is up, or that Australia's time as a car producer is up.
That is not my view.
That is not the unions' view.
That is not the workers' view.
That is not the Government's view.
And that is not Toyota's view.
We intend to have this industry for Australia's future.
Sure, there are new technological, competitive and environmental challenges.
There have been in the past- there will be in the future.
Each of these challenges represents a new opportunity.
With the right policy settings, as well as leadership from the industry itself, and from the workforce, the industry can adapt and become stronger than ever before.
And today's achievement is proof of that.
Today we see a win for motorists around the country.
A win also for action on climate change.
A win for jobs in here in Altona, and across Australia.
And by working together, the industry, the workers and Government, car making does have a future in this country.
This is all made possible too with a strong, effective economic partnership between the Australian Government, and the Government of Victoria.
And I congratulate the Premier on his leadership, and passionate support for the future of the vehicle industry here in Victoria- thank you John.
I conclude by saying this- you the workers here at Toyota are part of a great nation-building project.
When Australians look into their future, they want to know that we can be a nation that makes things that count for the future.
They want to know that we're building our economy, not just for the next twelve months, but for the next twenty years and beyond.
Nation building for recovery, nation building for the future, and this great plant - and you, the fantastic workers at this plant- are part of our nation building vision for this great country's future.
I salute each and every one of you on this great achievement today.
Thank you very much.


PM: Thank you very much. First of all, if I could thank my good friend and colleague, the Prime Minister of Japan for receiving me here in Tokyo today. This is my third visit to Japan in the two years that I've been Prime Minster of Australia, and it's good to be here among friends.
Australia and Japan now confront major challenges globally, one of which is the great challenge of climate change, another of which is the great challenge of nuclear weapons in this world of the 21st century. On the great challenge of climate change, Australia and Japan are acting. The Prime Minister and I have just had significant discussions on the conference in Copenhagen. Australia and Japan are both committed to acting at home through an emissions trading scheme. We are both committed to acting globally through a strong agreement in Copenhagen.
On the question of nuclear weapons and the future, non-proliferation and disarmament, can I say how much I appreciate the excellent work done by former foreign ministers Kawaguchi and Evans in producing this report. This has required a lot of work, a lot of blood, sweat and tears, and I thank them both for their extreme efforts in doing so.
This report, I believe, represents an important framework for discussions and debate on non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament in what will be a critical year in 2010. President Obama has called a nuclear security summit in Washington in April of next year. We have the NPT review conference due in May next year. I would therefore thank both the former foreign ministers for providing a report which provides such an important framework for those discussions to continue and to bring about practical results.
The Australian Government will, of course, frame it's response to the recommendations contained within this report during the course of 2010 in the lead up to those events, but speaking for Australia, we welcome the fact that a report of such substance has been produced to provide such an important framework for practical discussions on how to advance this great cause of non-proliferation disarmament in what will be a critical year for the world.
I conclude where I began, to congratulate these two eminent statesmen of our respective countries for doing the work that they have done, and their fellow commissioners, in producing such a report of quality, representing the findings of an independent commission on a critical challenge for us all in the century which lies before us. I thank you.


When the history of this century is written, this conference, and the results of this conference, may constitute one of its defining chapters.
History will record it as a time when either the peoples of the world, mindful of a common threat to us all, decided to act in concert against that threat - and so turned the tide of history.
Or else history will record this conference as a time when once again, we became so consumed with the petty nationalisms of the past, that we turned instead against each other and failed to act on this great common challenge of the future.
This history of much of the last century is littered with the carnage and the wreckage of ideologies incapable of embracing the common needs of all our peoples.
Yet here at the dawn of this century, we are privileged to have been given by history this opportunity and this responsibility to write a different narrative of human cooperation:
     * to act for those who have no voice, but who depend on us to give them voice;
     * to act for our children and our grandchildren and those not yet born, but who depend on us to give them voice;
     * to act for the planet.
These are the deep choices which lie before us.
In the next two days, we will assemble together as the largest gathering of global leaders in history.
This is no accidental gathering.
We gather because the peoples of the world demand that we gather.
And the peoples of the world will judge us not just as nations.
Each and every one of us here will be judged as individuals.
For what we say.
For what we do.
And for what we fail to do.
On how we as individual women and men gathered at this great conference have responded to the scientific reality of climate change.
And whether we have responded in conscience to the indisputable facts that science has put before us.
And history will be a harsh judge of us all.
None of us comes to this conference with clean hands.
The inescapable truth is that we the developed world carry the overwhelming historical responsibility for the accumulation of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere.
Any developed nation, large or small, which seeks to absolve itself of past responsibility for the problem the planet now confronts, is being dishonest.
Yet we must also bring the same spirit of inquiry to the problems of the future.
But if the developed world became carbon neutral and the developing world continued to grow on current trends, then the truth is that the emerging economies alone would be responsible for more than half of total global emissions by 2050 - and this would create a temperature rise of between 3.2 degrees and 4 degrees Celsius and even possibly higher.
The truth is that unless we all act together - because we are all in this together - there will be limited prospects of development because the planet itself will no longer sustain it.
That is why history is calling on us all to frame a Grand Bargain on climate change:
     * a Grand Bargain between past responsibility and future responsibility;
     * a Grand Bargain between the developed world and the developing world;
     * a Grand Bargain between the strongest and the most vulnerable;
     * a Grand Bargain between ourselves as the current custodians of the planet and those who will come after;
     * a Grand Bargain on climate change.
So what then is to be done in the little time that is left?
Words without deeds are a dead letter.
There have been millions of words spoken here, but as one of our colleagues said, it is time to stop talking, and start working.
It is time to take up the pen to define precisely the finite number of major policy differences between us:
     * On mitigation, our collective national ambitions now make up about two thirds of what we need to get on a path to our common ambition of 450 parts per million - and the task we have is to find the remaining 5 gigatonnes reduction across the largest economies;
     * On climate change finance to deal with the adaptation and mitigation needs of the poorest countries, we already have substantial agreement on fast start funding for the next three years and the prospect of agreement for the remaining seven;
     * On verification, I believe we can achieve a consensus on international and national means of accounting whether we honour our carbon commitments or not;
     * And on the future of the Kyoto Protocol and its intersection with a new Copenhagen Accord, we can I believe accommodate a common and integrated future for both international instruments which embrace the legal responsibilities of all parties - developed and developing.
These are the four major disagreements between us all.
You would not know that if you examine, as I have done, the 102 square bracketed areas of disagreement that lie in the existing text before us.
Nor would you know that if you listened to the avalanche of procedural interventions in this conference which is seen to be guided by a single purpose - to prevent the conference from distilling down our areas of disagreement to a manageable list so that leaders can decide.
I fear a triumph of form over substance; I fear a triumph of inaction over action.
Let us instead resolve to decide for our future - not simply to defer.
Climate change is no respecter of persons.
No respecter of cultures.
No respecter of nations.
Its consequences are vast.
Whether it is the washing away of villages in Tuvalu, Kiribati or the Maldives.
Whether it is the melting of the glaciers of the Tibetan Plateau.
Whether it is the 30 million of the most vulnerable people in the low lying areas of Bangladesh.
Whether it is the Chinese peasants dealing with unprecedented drought on the North China Plain.
Or the destruction of arable farmland in sub-Saharan Africa.
Or, in our own country, the destruction of one of the wonders of the world - the Great Barrier Reef.
Australia is one of the hottest and driest continents on earth.
That is why we need decisive action globally here in Copenhagen.
That is why the Australian government is committed to acting nationally through a Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme as the cheapest and most effective way to act at home.
It is global and national action together that makes a difference.
Before I left Australia, I was presented with a book of handwritten letters from a group of 6 year olds.
One of the letters is from Gracie.
Gracie is six - "Hi" she wrote. "My name is Gracie. How old are you?"
Gracie continues "I am writing to you because I want you all to be strong in Copenhagen... Please listen to us as it is our future."
I fear that at this conference, we are on the verge of letting little Gracie down.
And all of the little children across the world.
I would ask every Leader at this summit right now to ask themselves this simple question.
When I arrive home at the end of this week, will I be able to sit down, look my children in the eyes and tell them in clear conscience that I did absolutely everything I could to achieve action to avoid dangerous climate change.
Because if we cannot, then we will have failed in our basic duties as leaders of our nations, as fathers and mothers of our children and custodians of our nations' future.
The children of the world are watching.
They are listening.
And history will be the judge of each of us here today.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
I am delighted in the lead-up to Australia Day to join you in our nation's oldest and largest public gallery, a gallery that contains so much of our nation's artistic heritage.
Ours is not a history without blemishes, injustices or tragedies. You don't need to know very much about our early convict days and relations between Europeans and the First Australians to know our beginnings were far from glorious, but this makes the achievement of building the modern Australian nation all the more remarkable: a young nation, yet one of the world's oldest democracies; a stable, peaceful and prosperous nation yet with one of the most diverse populations of any country on earth; a nation for whom the spirit of the 'fair go' is part of our DNA; a nation for whom the spirit of the 'can-do' is also part of our DNA, and; and a nation that is the envy of the world. 
There is much to celebrate on Australia Day, and Melburnians this year will be doing it in style, though, as Premier Brumby always reminds me, Melburnians always do things with style.
I'm delighted that Victoria's finalist for the 2010 Australian of the Year Awards, Professor Patrick McGorry is also with us today. Professor McGorry is a leader in the medical profession who has invested 27 years in improving the treatment of young people suffering from mental illness.
He has done extraordinary work in building up Orygen Youth Health as a world-renowned mental health organisation which targets the needs of young people with emerging serious mental illness and has become a model for youth mental health services around the world.
Patrick, congratulations - and we wish you well for next week.
I ask you to cast your mind back 12 months ago to Australia Day 2009. None of us could have imagined the tragedy that was about to sweep across this state on Black Saturday, February 7: the worst bushfires in our nation's history; the worst natural disaster in our nation's history; a firestorm that took 173 lives; a firestorm that damaged many others; a firestorm that destroyed more than 2,000 homes.
The horrific images of those fires will remain forever with us, but so too will the memories of the extraordinary response to the fires, from across Victoria, from across Australia and from all across the world. In these our darkest days, the essential spirit of Australia shone like a beacon of hope, because when the big challenges come - and when our backs are against the wall - we respond as one nation. We respond as one people, because at times like these, our hearts beat as one and the colonial boundaries mapped by colonial surveyors nearly two centuries ago count for nothing.
All that ultimately matters is that we're Australian, that we're part of the Australian family, and to be Australian is to know that we're all in it together, that we look out for each other, that we work together for the good of all and for the good of the world. That is the essence of the Australian character.
We also saw this same national character on display last year as Australia confronted the worst global economic recession in 75 years. 12 months ago the global recession was bearing down upon us and around the world it was destroying all in its wake, but Australians came together to confront this common threat. Australians, in governments of all persuasions - state, territory and local - in businesses large and small; in unions and local communities right across the nation; worked hard with the Australian Government to confront this fundamental challenge to us all.
Together, we took strong, early and decisive action and the results speak for themselves. We are the only one of the Major Advanced Economies not to have gone into recession. Together, we have kept the economy strong and other nations look with envy at what we have achieved in Australia in responding to the challenge of the global recession.
That's why 12 months later, on Australia Day 2010, as we enter this second decade of the 21st century, we can be optimistic about our future. But we cannot be complacent about our future. As we enter this new decade, it's a good time to take stock, having charted a course thus far through the global economic crisis, to consider the long-term challenges that lie ahead for our nation - including:
     * the deep structural challenge of an ageing population and its implications for our future economy and society,
     * the enormous economic and environmental challenge of climate change, and
     * the challenge of building our future national and economic security in an increasingly competitive world - a world which does not owe us a living.
To help guide our nation's work, the Government has in recent months been preparing the Third Intergenerational Report, entitled Australia to 2050: Future Challenges. The Australia to 2050 report, which the Treasurer will release in coming weeks, analyses the key long-term challenges facing Australia for the first half of this new century because Australia must plan for the long term, not just the short term.
Central to our long-term challenges is the ageing of our population. To understand its implications, we need to ask three basic questions:
     * First, how much are we ageing by?
     * Second, how will this impact on family living standards and the economy?
     * Third, what can we do about it?
On the first question, the Intergenerational Report projects that our population will grow from 22 million today to 36 million by 2050. This is a big challenge in itself given its implications for services, infrastructure and our cities, but an equally large challenge will come from the fact that between now and 2050, the proportion of our population aged 65 and over will almost double from around 14 per cent to around 23 per cent. In other words, nearly one quarter of our population will be older than what we now refer to as the retirement age.
The second question is how the ageing of our population will impact our economy. At a national level, public finances will be burdened with the increased costs of looking after the needs of older Australians - in health, aged care and age pensions - but with a smaller proportion of Australians in the workforce, tax revenues won't keep pace with those rising costs.
The extent of that change is revealed by the dramatic change in the ratio of the number of people of working age (and paying taxes) to those aged 65 and over.
Forty years ago, in 1970, the ratio was 7.5 people of working age to every person 65 and over. In 2010, the ratio is 5 to 1, and in 40 years' time, in 2050, it is projected to fall so far that there will be just 2.7 people of working age for each person aged 65 and over.
Unless we make big changes, we will either generate large, unsustainable budget deficits into the second quarter of the century, or else we'll need to reduce government services - including health services - as the needs of an ageing population become greater.
This is not just a challenge for future governments. It will also become a challenge for working families, because with a smaller proportion of Australians in the workforce, the size of the national economic pie will grow more slowly, and as a result, average family incomes will grow at a slower rate than we've become accustomed to in recent years.
The third question is what can be done to strengthen economic growth in the face of the fundamental challenge we face from the ageing of the population. In the long-term, there are three sources of economic growth - the three Ps of population, workforce participation and productivity growth.
With lower fertility rates and stable migration ratios, population policy will on current trends at best make a marginal contribution to the challenge of an ageing population.
The truth is that the strong policy levers lie with policy measures to lift participation and productivity growth.
We must do all we can to lift workforce participation by reducing barriers to entry to the workforce. The Government has already acted on this front, to remove barriers to work for women and young people with greater investment in childcare, new measures to get young unemployed people into the workforce and the proposed introduction of Paid Parental Leave.
But the Treasury's analysis shows that even with all these measures, workforce participation will fall over the next 40 years - from its peak of around 65 per cent now to around 60 per cent by 2050. This will detract from economic growth and constrain future growth in family incomes.
This takes us to the last and most important of the three Ps - productivity growth. It is productivity growth that must play the central role in building Australia's future economic growth. The first decade of the 21st century saw not an increase, but a decline, in productivity growth. During the 1990s, productivity growth hit the two per cent mark following the reforms of the Hawke-Keating Governments, but it fell to just 1.4 per cent in the first decade of this century. If we let this trend of lower productivity growth continue, Australia will struggle to meet the major challenges facing our economy in the decades ahead.
The Third Intergenerational Report provides for the first time an assessment of just what would be the cost of continuing on a path of low productivity growth compared to returning to the strong productivity growth path of the previous decade. The Australia to 2050 report shows that without a concerted effort to increase productivity, average annual productivity growth will be just 1.6 per cent over the next 40 years, leading to average annual economic growth rate falling to 2.7 per cent, compared to the historical average of 3.3 per cent over the last 40 years.
But with a concerted effort to raise productivity, we can lift average productivity growth back towards 2 per cent per year, and achieve an average annual economic growth rate of just above 3 per cent. The high productivity path would result in our economy growing an extra 15 per cent by 2050, against what would otherwise be the case. By 2049-50, that would add around $570 billion to Australia's annual economic output in today's dollar terms and as a result it would increase living standards for all Australians.
The report concludes that if we return productivity growth to two per cent a year, average living standards for Australians, measured by real GDP per capita, would be $16,000 higher per year by 2050, so on average, if we boost productivity growth, by 2050 every Australian man, woman and child would be $16,000 better off a year. That is why raising productivity is so important to building Australia's future, and that's why working families trying to make ends meet have a special interest in growing Australia's productive capacity, and that's why higher productivity is crucial to building Australia's future.
Australia must take decisive action to drive productivity growth forward - to improve living standards, to deliver better services while keeping the Budget on a sustainable footing, and to improve Australia's international competitiveness. The Government has already begun investing in the key drivers of productivity in its first two years in office:
     * by investing in record levels of long-term nation-building economic infrastructure - more than $18 billion worth of investments, including in roads, rail and ports;
     * by implementing an education revolution, doubling the investment in Australian schools over the next five years, and increasing overall real investment in education by over 50 per cent;
     * by investing in business innovation, including innovative manufacturing and helping businesses use technology to work smarter and faster wherever they are, through the high-speed National Broadband Network, and
     * by implementing microeconomic reforms to cut red tape for business and build a seamless national economy.
This is the productivity growth agenda I outlined in a major essay in July last year, setting out the path to economic recovery and growth. It reflects the priorities I set out in January 2007 in my first major policy release as Leader of the Opposition and it is the agenda to which the Australian Government is committed as we enter a new decade, what I describe as Australia's Building Decade: a decade of building a stronger economy for the future; a decade of building a more productive economy for the future; beyond nation-building for recovery, now nation-building for the future.
Ahead of Australia Day next week, I will be visiting every state and territory and discussing in a series of addresses different dimensions of the long-term economic challenges we face as well as discussing our response to those challenges. We are determined to make decisions for the long term, even if the benefits of those decisions won't always be immediate.
In fact, the pipeline between implementing reforms and their positive impacts takes many years and goes beyond many election cycles. Building Australia's future must start now.
I am profoundly optimistic about Australia's future. While we face significant challenges, the extraordinary achievements of past generations show just how much Australians can do when they come together in the face of great challenges of the future.
In the first decade of the 20th century, we became a nation and laid the foundations for one of the fairest societies in the world through such achievements as the living wage, age pensions and the right for all women to vote and stand for Parliament.
In the 1940s, we fought a war that threatened our very survival and laid the foundations for the long post-war economic boom, expanding immigration, building our suburbs and expanding educational opportunities for a generation returning from war.
In the 1980s, we created a dynamic, modern economy that could compete with the rest of the world, laying the foundations for the strong performance of the past two decades.
In the 2010s, we have the opportunity again to build Australia's future and lay foundations for a stronger Australia, a fairer Australia, one prepared to face the challenges of the future.
We must make this the decade of opportunities seized, not of opportunities squandered. We face formidable challenges, but Australians have the capacity, the resilience and the spirit to rise to each one and together to build Australia's future. 


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
In the coming week, people around Tasmania - like Australians across our whole nation - will be joining in celebrations for Australia Day, some on the back verandah at home, some with friends and family at the beach, some at picnics and barbeques in parks and neighbourhoods across the state and some taking part in events organised by local communities across the state - events like the Australia Day Breakfast on the Bellerive Boardwalk, the Devonport Dance Fiesta, and what could be more Australian than the Gumboot Throwing Competition at Henley-on-Mersey?
There's also the Tassie event that really sparked my interest - the great Aussie Dummy Spit. I'd be glad to send down some politicians from Canberra to compete. I'm confident they'll provide strong competition. After all, they certainly get good practice.
Cast your mind back to the challenges our nation was facing 12 months ago. In the lead-up to Australia Day 2009, I came to this same historic building and spoke about the enormous challenge we faced with the worst global recession in 75 years. Since then, the global recession has taken unemployment into double digit figures in many countries across the world, but in Australia, we are weathering the global storm.
Tasmania's unemployment rate, while it has risen 0.4 percentage points in the last year to 5.2 per cent, is below the national average. Indeed, Tasmania is earning the name of Australia's Tiger economy, with the equal fastest growth rate among all states in the last financial year. As a nation, we have the fastest growth, lowest debt, lowest deficit and the second lowest unemployment rate when compared with the Major Advanced Economies.
2009 was a tough year, but Australia rose to the challenge of the global financial crisis and we showed what can be done when we all join together and work together, governments of all persuasions - state, territory and local - businesses large and small, unions and local communities right across the nation.
On Australia Day 2010, as we enter this second decade of the 21st century, Australians can be optimistic about our future. However, we cannot be complacent about the future.
This week I am travelling across the nation ahead of Australia Day in a series of addresses on our need as a nation to prepare for our long-term future challenges. We know that we have major long-term challenges to tackle if we are to keep our economy strong: the challenges of our ageing population; a fiercely competitive global economy; and the enormous environmental and economic challenge of climate change.
Building Australia's future and tackling these challenges will require much work. To help guide that work, the Commonwealth Treasury has been preparing the third Intergenerational Report, entitled Australia to 2050: Future Challenges. The Australia to 2050 report, which the Treasurer will release in coming weeks, analyses the key long-term challenges facing Australia over the next 40 years.
The ageing of our population is central to those challenges, and that is revealed by three key facts I discussed last night in Melbourne. The first fact concerns the extent of the ageing of our population. Today there are 22 million Australians, of whom 14 per cent are over the age of 65. By 2050, there will be 36 million Australians - but an equally momentous change is that the proportion of those over 65 will almost double to 23 per cent. That's nearly one in four Australians - compared to just one in seven Australians in 2010.
The second key fact is that this will significantly affect our economy and working families around the nation. It will simply cost more to look after the needs of older Australians in health, aged care and age pensions. t the same time, a smaller proportion of Australians will be working, so tax revenues won't keep pace with those rising costs.
In 1970, there were 7.5 people of working age to support every person over 65. Today, there are five. By 2050, that number is projected to drop to 2.7, so we will face higher costs yet slower economic growth, and that is the heart of the economic challenge of an ageing population.
The third key fact is that we will need a sustained, strong and long-term national effort to respond to this challenge focused on raising productivity and removing barriers to people participating in the workforce. The Government has already acted to lift workforce participation by removing barriers to work for women and young people, but even with these measures, workforce participation will fall over the next 40 years from its peak of around 65 per cent now to around 60 per cent by 2050, so our long-term response to the ageing of our population must centre on a sustained effort to increase annual productivity growth.
We need to turn around the decline in productivity growth that occurred in the past decade, when it fell to an annual average of 1.4 per cent. Yesterday, I outlined that if we could lift average productivity growth back towards the 1990s mark of 2 per cent per year, it would produce enormous benefits for the nation and for Australian families. By 2049-50, the higher productivity path would add around $570 billion to Australia's annual economic output - and that is in today's dollar terms - and on average, every Australian man, woman and child would be $16,000 better off a year, and because of that we would be able to raise more tax revenue than would otherwise be the case to fund increased outlays on health, aged care and pensions.
These are three core reasons why raising productivity is so important, and it is why building Australia's long-term economic future must start now. The Government has already begun investing in the key drivers of productivity:
     * In long-term nation-building economic infrastructure;
     * In our education revolution;
     * In innovation, in particular through the high-speed National Broadband Network, and
     * By implementing microeconomic reforms to cut red tape for business and building a seamless national economy.
This is the agenda to which the Australian government is committed as we enter a new decade - a period that I describe as Australia's Building Decade.
This afternoon I want to make some specific remarks about what the ageing of the population means for the outlook for government finances. This is an important long-term challenge facing our nation, arising from an historic structural change in our population mix.
The Australian Government's early and decisive response to the global financial crisis during the past 18 months has limited the extent of permanent damage to the Australian economy. Australia, unique among the Major Advanced Economies, has avoided recession. We have generated the second lowest unemployment and the lowest debt and the lowest deficits.
Of course, these achievements have not come without cost. The reduction in forecast Government revenues by a staggering $170 billion because of the crisis, together with fiscal stimulus have put the Budget into temporary deficit.
Importantly, the Government has implemented a fiscal strategy that ensures a return from deficit as rapidly as possible. The latest Treasury budget figures released in the Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook show the Government is on track to return the Budget to surplus by 2015-16. Without this clear-cut fiscal strategy, net debt would be significantly higher in the future.
Our timely, targeted and temporary response to the crisis has helped minimise permanent damage to the economy, by minimising the loss of skills that occurs with unemployment, and the loss of capital investment that occurs with recession. This is the core of conservative economic management - expanding the role of government in the economy when the private sector is in retreat, and contracting that role as the private sector recovers.
The Government's medium-term fiscal strategy puts Australia in a stronger position to respond to long-term challenges, including our ageing population. Nevertheless, the ageing of the population of itself will create significant additional challenges for our public finances for the long term, challenges that must be addressed.
Tonight I am releasing new findings from the Third Intergenerational Report, Australia To 2050 on the ageing of our population and the long-term health of the Budget. These findings underscore the concerns that I expressed before coming to government about the budget spending that occurred throughout much of the past decade. The aftermath of higher budget expenditure during the late 1990s and in the 2000s makes it tougher to deal with the long-term budget impacts of ageing of the population.
While it is common for governments to increase spending growth during times of financial crisis, governments in boom times ought to exercise spending restraint, so as to avoid overheating the economy, crowding out private investment and embedding into the Budget long-term recurrent expenditure commitments that become more difficult to meet once boom time tax revenues cease to flow. The new Treasury modelling prepared for the Australia to 2050 report shows that this high level of government spending of the late 1990s and early 2000s has locked in a permanently higher spending base. This makes responding to the long-term structural challenges to fiscal policy caused by the ageing of the population even more difficult to meet.
The average annual real growth in government spending was 2.5 per cent in the growth period of the 1990s (from 1992-93 to 1999-00), but during the expansion of the 2000s decade (from 2001-02 to 2007-08), when the economy was benefiting from the mining boom, average real growth in government spending actually increased to 3.8 per cent. This is the fastest growth in government spending during any expansion period since the early 1970s under the Whitlam Government.
The Australia to 2050 report concludes that continuing fiscal restraint is essential once the constraints of the global financial crisis ease. The Government has adopted a strict fiscal strategy to support the economy during the global downturn and return the budget to surplus as the economy recovers:
     * As the economy recovers, and grows above trend, the fiscal strategy requires us to hold real spending growth to two per cent a year until the budget returns to surplus;
     * And to allow the level of tax receipts to recover naturally, but not exceed our existing commitment to keep tax as a share of GDP below the 2007-08 level on average.
In the Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook, we delivered on these fiscal rules, as well as fully offsetting all new spending with savings.
It is crucial that as a nation, we sustain fiscal discipline as we confront the long-term challenge of an ageing population. As our population ages, it will also require a different mix of government services and support - in particular, more provision for health care, aged care and age pensions.
We must also embrace new ways of delivering services to meet the changing needs of Australians in coming decades, as well as ensuring the cost-effectiveness of all publicly funded services. The Government has already had to take action to make sure older Australians can access a secure age pension system that is fiscally sustainable.
Some of the steps we must take to ensure fiscal sustainability will not be popular, but they will pay dividends over the longer term.
The Government's fiscal strategy addresses the ageing of the population by delivering a permanent structural improvement in Australia's public finances. The long-term consequence of the Government's medium-term fiscal strategy is that by 2049-50, the Budget outcome will be around 3.5 per cent of GDP better off - or $130 billion in today's dollar terms. In other words, the Government's commitment to responsible budget settings will put us in a significantly better long-term budget position.
Just as previous higher levels of spending have had a long term impact on the Budget, similarly the Government's commitment to medium-term fiscal restraint will deliver long-term fiscal benefits by undertaking structural repair to Australia's public finances.
Of course, the consequences of an ageing population do not only point to the need for fiscal sustainability. They also underscore the critical need to continue to invest in productivity growth, the subject I addressed in Melbourne yesterday.
A more productive economy will mean the economic pie grows larger and faster, and in terms of budget policy, this in turn means more revenue to fund quality services for Australians into the future. That is why a sustainable budget policy based on expenditure constraint, together with a comprehensive agenda for productivity that boosts economic growth and revenues, constitute the two core planks of a credible, long-term fiscal strategy for Australia that addresses the challenge of an ageing population.
The decisions we take in this new decade will shape Australia's future for decades to come. That's why I describe the decade ahead as the Building Decade: building stronger, more sustainable economic growth; building a sustainable budget strategy; building Australia's future.
Australia Day is not only a time when we can look to the challenges of the future. It is also a time to acknowledge the great achievements of individuals in building the modern Australia of today.
On each Australia Day, we recognise those individual contributions through the Australian of the Year Awards, which turn 50 years old this year. These awards are a great way for us all to say thanks and well done, to some of our nation's highest achievers - Australians who have achieved the highest in their field of endeavour; Australians who have served their community and made us all proud of our nation; Australians who are an inspiration to all of us; Australians who remind us why we have such good reason to be optimistic about our nation's future.
Tasmania's own 2010 Finalist for the Australian of the Year Award is a man who came for a visit from England and couldn't leave. As he tells the story, he fell in love not only with Australia and its people, but also with one of our great Australian icons: the Tasmanian Devil, and for years Bruce has dedicated himself to giving back to his adopted country, working day and night to find a way to save the Tassie Devil from the facial tumours that threaten to wipe out the species.
The Australian Government has supported this cause, with funding of $10 million for research into the transmission and treatment of the disease. This is nationally important work, so I'm sure you'll join me in wishing Bruce the very, very best for his work and for next week's Awards.
The strength of the finalists each year for the Australian of the Year Award reminds us that the Australian spirit is alive and well in 2010: the spirit of the pioneers, of the Gold Rush, of Eureka, of Barcaldine, of Gallipoli, of Kokoda, of the Boxing Kangaroo and the winged keel, and of the Sydney Olympics; the spirit of the "fair go", together with the spirit of the "can do"; the spirit of Australia.
And that spirit can be found in every corner and every community in Australia. That community spirit of looking after your mates, and compassion for those in need. The individual spirit that relishes a challenge and that simply says 'let's get on with it'. The courage and resilience that stands up to tough challenges without making a fuss. The no-nonsense informality that marks us out as Australians wherever we go across the world.
Those Aussie traits have been with us for as long as time remembers, so let's take pride in what our nation has achieved and let's roll up our sleeves and get on with our work in the building decade ahead. 


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
It is a great pleasure to be here in Adelaide to mark the celebration of Australia Day for 2010. Here in South Australia people will be celebrating Australia Day 2010 in many different ways: at home in the backyard; at the beach; in a local park; and perhaps some taking the opportunity to visit the zoo and meet the latest additions to the list of distinguished citizens of Adelaide - Wang Wang and Funi.
I understand Australia Day will see a strong gathering at West Terrace Cemetery, to remember the pioneers of South Australia and to engage in the customary rousing rendition of The Song of Australia, a song that came close to becoming our national anthem at the 1977 referendum.
I understand also that down in Glenelg, hundreds of South Australians will be participating in the Havaiana Australia Day Thong Challenge, an event that, I am advised, will see a large number of South Australians floating on massive, mutant versions of Australia's national footwear. The challenge, I understand, is to beat the record from Bondi Beach last year, where 908 people were afloat. It should be a memorable Australia Day in Glenelg.
Exactly one year ago, in the lead-up to Australia Day 2009, I came to Adelaide and spoke about the enormous challenge we faced with the worst global recession in 75 years. Since then, the global recession has taken unemployment into double digit figures in many countries across the world, but in Australia, we are weathering the global storm.
As a nation, Australia now has the fastest growth, lowest debt, lowest deficit and the second lowest unemployment rate when compared with the major advanced economies. The strong consumer confidence index numbers released today, showing a 5.6 per cent increase in January, give us further reason to be optimistic about the year ahead.
South Australia's unemployment rate actually fell last year - from 5.7 per cent at the beginning of the year, to 5.3 per cent at the end. That's an extraordinary achievement.
2009 was a tough year, but Australia rose to the challenge of the global financial crisis. It shows what can be done when we all join together and work together, governments of all persuasions - state, territory and local; businesses large and small; unions and local communities right across the nation.
On Australia Day 2010, as we enter this second decade of the 21st century, Australians can be optimistic about our future, but we cannot afford to mistake optimism for complacency.
This week I am travelling across the nation ahead of Australia Day in a series of addresses on our need as a nation to prepare for our long-term future challenges. Today, I want to discuss the role of investment in advanced 21st century infrastructure, in lifting productivity growth and responding to the challenge of an ageing population.
The Government will shortly release the third Intergenerational Report, entitled Australia to 2050: Future Challenges. The Australia to 2050 report analyses the key long-term challenges facing Australia over the next 40 years - three key facts.
The first key fact: our population will grow substantially over the next forty years. By 2050, the Australian population is expected to grow from 22 million to 36 million. That increase alone will put huge pressure on our towns and our cities. We will need more homes, more roads, more rail lines, more hospitals, more schools just to accommodate so many Australians.
Then take into account that the population is ageing. Today, the proportion of Australians who are aged 65 and over, and are therefore most likely out of the workforce, is 14 per cent. By 2050, that figure will almost double to 23 per cent.
That's almost one in four Australians, compared to just one in seven Australians in 2010.
The second key fact is that this will significantly affect our economy and working families around the nation. Building the infrastructure we will need for a population of 36 million will require significant investment. On top of that, it will simply cost more to look after older Australians in health, aged care and age pensions.
At the same time, a smaller proportion of Australians will be working, so tax revenues won't keep pace with those rising costs. In 1970, there were 7.5 people of working age to support every person over 65. Today, there are five. By 2050, that number is projected to drop to 2.7.
So we will face higher costs yet slower economic growth, and that is the heart of the economic challenge of an ageing population.
The third key fact is that we will need a sustained, strong and long-term national effort to respond to this challenge with a focus on raising productivity and removing barriers to people participating in the workforce. The Government has already acted to lift workforce participation by removing barriers to work for women and young people, but even with these measures, workforce participation will fall over the next 40 years from its peak of around 65 per cent now to around 60 per cent by 2050, so our long-term response to the ageing of our population must centre on a sustained effort to increase annual productivity growth.
We need to lift average productivity growth back towards the 1990s mark of 2 per cent per year, up from the 1.4 per cent that it declined to in the first decade of this century. Achieving that goal would produce enormous benefits for the nation and for Australian families. On average, every Australian man, woman and child would be $16,000 better off a year in 2050 if productivity returns to the levels under the Hawke and Keating Governments.
But there is a long time lag between implementing the policies that can lift long-term productivity, and experiencing their payoffs. That is why building Australia's future must start now.
Yesterday in Hobart I discussed another dimension of the challenge posed by the ageing population, the challenge to the sustainability of government budgets. As I noted earlier, the ageing of our population will result in higher costs for health, aged care and the age pension. It will also result in a smaller proportion of the population being in work, thus slowing the rate of growth of government revenues.
The task of meeting the challenge of the ageing population has also been made more difficult by the aftermath of higher budget expenditure during the late 1990s and in the 2000s, which has locked in a permanently higher spending base. During the growth period of the 2000s, the average real growth in government spending actually increased to 3.8 per cent, compared to 2.5 per cent during the growth period of the 1990s.
In response to this challenge, the Government has committed to a fiscal strategy that will help us manage the challenge of an ageing population by delivering a permanent structural improvement in Australia's public finances. The long-term consequence of the Government's medium-term fiscal strategy is that by 2049-50, the Budget outcome will be around 3.5 per cent of GDP better off, or $130 billion in today's dollar terms. The Government's commitment to fiscal discipline builds sustainability into the Budget.
The ageing of our population demands two strategies: first, that we lift our workforce participation and our productivity in order to lift economic growth, and second, that we pursue a disciplined fiscal strategy to deal with the additional needs of our ageing population.
Building productivity is the key for Australia's long-term economic future. I describe the new decade that we have just begun as Australia's Building Decade, putting in place the building blocks of long-term productivity growth. It is our Building Decade because now is the time when we must implement the big policy changes to drive higher productivity growth.
Advanced infrastructure will play a central role in putting Australia back on track to higher productivity growth. Its productivity impact will be complemented by the productivity benefits of the education revolution and the comprehensive microeconomic reform agenda that the Government has underway.
The Australia to 2050 report highlights something that is well understood by South Australians, that infrastructure plays a key role in long-term economic expansion.
The key points I want to make this afternoon about the role of infrastructure in building Australia's future are these:
     * First, economic evidence, including that cited in the Australia to 2050 report, shows that infrastructure investment contributes directly to a more productive, growing economy.
     * Second, despite this fact, measures of Australia's infrastructure investment in recent decades show a trend decline in our infrastructure investment. That has contributed to a growing backlog of infrastructure projects and an increasing number of choke points that have held back our economic growth.
     * Third, in response to the infrastructure backlog, the Australian Government has for the first time made infrastructure a national priority.
We are providing national leadership in infrastructure investment through Infrastructure Australia evaluating and for the first time prioritising nationally important infrastructure projects, and through increasing the Commonwealth's infrastructure investment.
We are also undertaking regulatory reforms to remove roadblocks to infrastructure investment.
This strategy is a key part of how we intend to make the decade ahead Australia's building decade.
The Australia to 2050 report cites the International Monetary Fund showing that there's a direct link between investing more in public infrastructure and increasing economic growth. According to the IMF research, in developed countries like Australia an increase in the public infrastructure stock by 1 per cent leads to an increase in output by around 0.2 per cent.
It also cites Productivity Commission research showing that improving the efficiency of Australia's energy and transport infrastructure could, after a period of adjustment, increase GDP by nearly 2 per cent.
This research is not surprising. What is surprising is Australia's track record in infrastructure investment.
The long-term trend for that investment is that it has not been increasing, but falling. A 2009 OECD report shows that Australia's investment in transport, storage and communications infrastructure as a percentage of GDP fell between the 1980s and 1990s, and fell again in the first decade of this century. In contrast, across the OECD group of developed nations, infrastructure investment for these sectors has been rising.
If this trend continues, Australia will fall further behind other nations on productivity and in the long term, on future growth and living standards. Australia's shortfall on infrastructure investment has generated a yawning gap between the infrastructure we've got and the infrastructure we need. We see this in ports, in freight, in rail, on our roads and in broadband.
A few years ago the Business Council of Australia estimated the infrastructure deficit at $90 billion. Addressing the infrastructure gap will involve large scale investment and take a long period of time. One measure of the scale of the task from Citigroup estimates that Australia is set to spend $770 billion on infrastructure in the decade to 2018 - underscoring the extent to which this must be the Building Decade.
Given the infrastructure backlog, it must be a national economic priority to facilitate and support investment in advanced infrastructure. The Government is committed to providing that leadership, and investing in the infrastructure of tomorrow, from transport and freight networks to the high-speed National Broadband Network.
First, we have established an overall policy framework for infrastructure investment. 
In 2008, shortly after coming to office, the Government established Infrastructure Australia. For the first time in our nation's history, with Infrastructure Australia we have a central body to advise on the long-term planning of our infrastructure needs.
Second, we have increased the national investment in infrastructure. That includes a record $36 billion national investment in transport infrastructure in roads, railways and ports.
Third, we are acting on the regulatory reforms needs to foster increased infrastructure investment. We are undertaking significant policy reforms including creating single national regulators for heavy vehicles, rail safety and maritime safety.
Finally today, I want to address just one part of the task ahead in the 'Building Decade' that is crucial to the productivity of Australian businesses, both large and small. That is freight transport - our ability to move commodities, food, all kinds of products from one place to another in markets across the nation and across the world.
According to work conducted by IBIS World for a 2009 report by Infrastructure Partnerships Australia, Australia's freight task will triple by 2050 - from 503 billion tonne kilometres to 1,540 billion tonne kilometres. Meeting this task will require a massive effort - companies will have to improve transport and logistics strategies and efficiencies, and governments will have to undertake substantial new investment and policy reform.
According to IBIS World, transport infrastructure investment should be increased by 2050 to $62.5 billion, almost four times the spending levels of 2008. A 2008 Interim Priority List compiled by Infrastructure Australia, identified as priorities 40 road projects worth $69 billion, eight freight rail projects worth $16 billion and six port and airport projects worth $6 billion.
The needs are truly staggering, but meeting the freight task isn't only about Commonwealth investment. It's also about policy coordination and reform to provide the right incentives for private sector investment as well. That's why in 2010, the transport priority for the Council of Australian Governments will be freight transport.
Infrastructure Australia is currently focusing its work on two new strategies: a National Ports Strategy and a Freight Network Plan. Initial work by Infrastructure Australia in these areas already suggests some important principles for these strategic plans:
     * coordination along the supply chain is a major field for productivity improvement for business;
     * the freight network is not simply about individual road and rail projects, but a set of 'nodes' that are interconnected by road, rail, sea and air 'links', and
     * the case for dedicated road and rail freight infrastructure has become stronger to minimise conflict with passenger transport and economic losses.
I look forward to considering this work in detail later in the year.
Building a better future for Australia requires leadership at the national level on key areas of economic policy, but equally, it relies on the efforts of individual Australians in every walk of life, Australians who demonstrate courage, persistence, ingenuity and compassion.
One of the ways we recognise such individual achievement at this time of year is through the Australian of the Year Awards. South Australia's finalist for 2010, Julian Burton, is a man who has shown great strength of character and dedication to helping others. Julian sustained life-threatening third degree burns in the 2002 Bali bombings, but he has turned that terrible experience to good in service of the community. Through the Julian Burton Burns Trust, he is working to improve the prevention of, care for and research into burn injury.
I know South Australians will be proud of him as he stands alongside his fellow finalists in Canberra next week when the Australian of the Year is announced.
So for each of you this afternoon, I wish you all a very happy Australia Day for next week and I hope you take a moment to enjoy the sense of pride in being part of a great state and a great country. So it's with great pleasure I ask you to raise your glasses filled with the finest South Australian wine as I propose a toast to Australia. 


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
It's great to be in Perth to kick off celebrations for our national day.
And a real pleasure to stand in this magnificent Perth Town Hall.
A town hall with the historic distinction of being the only one in Australia that was built by convicts - rather reluctantly, one presumes - during the controversial period when John Stephen Hampton was Governor of the colony of Western Australia.
Hampton's vigorous public works program, combined with strict financial discipline, advanced Western Australia's development at a time when Australia was being transformed by its first mining boom.
And Hampton embodied the 'can-do' spirit that marks out Australians, and in particular, West Australians.
This is a 'can-do' city in a 'can-do' state.
A state that has outperformed the rest of the nation during the first decade of the 21st century, with a growth rate of 4.1 per cent per year during the past decade, compared to the annual national average of 3.2 per cent per year.
A state that has every reason for optimism as it enters a new decade, with the promise of continued strong growth.
And a state that has every reason to celebrate on January 26 as the nation observes Australia Day 2010.
I want to make special mention of the local celebrations in Toodyay next week.
People in Toodyay have been doing it tough after the fires in late December which destroyed 38 homes.
On Australia Day, local Australia Day celebrations will be honouring the members of the Fire and Emergency Services Authority volunteer bush fire service. The men and women who fought those fires are true Australian heroes - and we all salute them.
Australia Day provides an opportunity to reflect not only on the events of December but also on the past 12 months.
This time last year when I came to Perth, I spoke about the enormous challenge we faced with the worst global recession in 75 years.
The good news is that this state, like our national economy, has been weathering the global storm.
Despite 2009 being a tough year, Australia rose to the challenge of the global financial crisis.
As a nation, we have the fastest growth, lowest debt, lowest deficit and the second lowest unemployment rate when compared with the Major Advanced Economies.
Here in Western Australia, the unemployment rate has risen some 2 percentage points in the last year, reflecting the impact of the global recession.
Nevertheless, unemployment remains below the national average, at 5.1 per cent.
Our response to the economic maelstrom demonstrated what can be done when we all work together - across political and state lines - in local government; in businesses large and small; in unions and local communities right across the nation.
I am profoundly optimistic about Australia's future.
Not because Australia is guaranteed future success and prosperity.
There are no such guarantees in a fast-changing world like ours.
But I'm optimistic because I believe Australians have the determination and ability to seize the opportunities of the future, and tackle the significant long-term challenges we are now facing.
This week I am travelling across the nation ahead of Australia Day in a series of addresses on our need as a nation to prepare for our long-term future challenges.
Analysis of the long-term challenges facing Australia over the next 40 years is contained in Australia's Third Intergenerational Report, entitled Australia to 2050: Future Challenges, which will be released in coming weeks.
On Monday in Melbourne, I discussed how the ageing of the population over coming decades will result in slower economic growth unless we implement the long-term changes needed to move to a higher productivity growth path.
On Tuesday in Hobart, I discussed how the ageing of the population will also create additional long-term budget pressures for all governments unless we act to boost economic growth and therefore revenue growth, through boosting productivity on one hand, and on the other hand implementing our medium-term fiscal strategy to return to surplus.
Yesterday in Adelaide, I discussed why I believe the decade ahead must be a Building Decade - and how important advanced 21st century infrastructure is if we are to move to a higher productivity growth path.
Today in Perth I want to discuss why, with an ageing population, this Building Decade must include the aim of building the best educated, best skilled, best trained workforce in the world.
A workforce with the skills to work smarter and to be the engine room of the nation's long-term productivity growth.
The facts on the ageing of our population revealed in the report are stark. 
Today we are a nation of 22 million Australians, of whom 14 per cent - one in seven - are over the age of 65.
By 2050, we will be a nation of 36 million Australians, of whom 23 per cent - one in four - will be over 65.
That is a dramatic change, with dramatic economic impacts.
The economic impact is that it will simply cost more to look after the needs of older Australians - in health, aged care and age pensions.
At the same time, a smaller proportion of Australians will be working, so tax revenues won't keep pace with those rising costs.
In fact, workforce participation will fall - from its peak of around 65 per cent now, to around 60 per cent by 2050.
In 1970, there were 7.5 people of working age to pay tax and support every person over 65. Today, there are five. By 2050, that number is projected to drop to 2.7.
So we will face higher costs yet slower economic growth - and that is the heart of the economic challenge of an ageing population.
We need to ask ourselves: how can we strengthen growth in the face of this challenge?
Treasury's intergenerational modelling tells us the number one answer is productivity growth.
The Treasury analysis undertaken for the Australia to 2050 report shows that if average productivity growth was lifted back towards the 1990s mark of 2 per cent per year - up from the 1.4 per cent to which it declined in the decade just passed - this would produce enormous benefits for the nation and for Australian families.
On average, every Australian man, woman and child would be $16,000 better off a year in 2050.
We should not think such a change is simple. It will require a great deal of effort, and cannot happen overnight.
And we should remember that the pipeline between productivity-boosting investments and the productivity payoffs will often be several years and even several electoral cycles.
But it illustrates that even a small enhancement in long-term productivity growth will deliver large future benefits.
That is why the Government is already committed to building advanced infrastructure, advancing the education revolution, fostering innovation and creating a seamless national economy through our microeconomic reform agenda.
On Tuesday in Hobart I discussed a further dimension of the challenge posed by the ageing population - the challenge to the sustainability of government budgets.
The task of meeting the challenge of the ageing population has been made more difficult by the aftermath of higher budget expenditure during the late 1990s and in the 2000s, which has locked in a permanently higher spending base.
During the growth period of the 2000s, the average real growth in government spending actually increased to 3.8 per cent, compared to 2.5 per cent during the growth period of the 1990s.
In response to this challenge, the Government has committed to a medium-term fiscal strategy that will help us manage the challenge of an ageing population by delivering a permanent structural improvement in Australia's public finances. The long-term consequence of the Government's medium-term fiscal strategy is that by 2049-50, the Budget outcome will be around 3.5 per cent of GDP better off - or $130 billion in today's dollar terms.
The Government's commitment to fiscal discipline builds sustainability into the Budget and is an important element in preparing for the challenges of the future.
Yesterday in Adelaide I addressed the role of advanced infrastructure in enhancing long-term productivity growth.
In explaining why I describe this new decade we have just begun as Australia's Building Decade, I made three key points.
First, economic evidence - including that cited in the Australia to 2050 report - clearly shows that infrastructure investment contributes directly to a more productive, growing economy.
Second, and despite this fact, measures of Australia's infrastructure investment in recent decades show a trend decline in our infrastructure investment. That has contributed to a growing backlog of infrastructure projects, and an increasing number of choke points that have held back our economic growth.
Third, the Government has made infrastructure a national priority since coming to government:
     * by the national government taking a leading national role for the first time in national infrastructure policy;
     * by establishing Infrastructure Australia to advise on the long-term planning of our infrastructure needs;
     * increasing the national investment in productive infrastructure including a $36 billion investment in transport infrastructure including roads, railways and ports; and
     * by tackling regulatory reforms to remove the hurdles to increased infrastructure investment from the private sector.
This afternoon I want to make some specific remarks about the importance of having a highly skilled population if we are to move to a higher productivity growth path and respond to the challenge of an ageing population with a smaller proportion of Australians in the workforce.
It is important to understand that enhancing productivity is about giving workers and businesses the skills, infrastructure and positive business environment to work smarter.
The key points I want to make about the role of a highly-skilled workforce in building Australia's future are these:
First, economic evidence - including that cited in the Australia to 2050 report - highlights that higher levels of education and skills not only increase earnings for individuals, they contribute to higher overall productivity for the nation in the longer term.
Second, despite this fact, Australia has not made adequate long-term investment in education in recent decades.
In addition, we know that during the global economic recession, the number of new apprenticeship commencements dropped dramatically.
This has the potential to worsen the long-standing skill shortages in key industries that will re-emerge as economic growth recovers.
Third, the Government is already taking steps under our long-term plan to advance the education revolution, with the goal of building the best-educated, best-trained, most highly skilled workforce in the world.
The education revolution extends from early childhood through schooling to vocational education, apprenticeships, university and research - today, I want to discuss specific measures we are taking to boost apprenticeships and counter the fall in industry training in response to the economic downturn.
Analysis in the Australia to 2050 report highlights the link between education and skills and higher overall national productivity.
The Australia to 2050 Report notes Productivity Commission research estimating that improvements related to education and training - early learning, higher education attainment and increases in numeracy and literacy - could raise aggregate labour productivity by up to 1.2 per cent.
If we could lift real GDP by 1.2% in 2049-50, it would mean a larger economy - around $45 billion in today's dollars - or the equivalent of around $1,200 for each Australian.
And OECD research shows that if the average level of education of the working-age population was increased by one year, the economy would be 3-6 per cent larger, and the growth rate of the economy would be up to 1 per cent higher. If the economy in 2049-50 was 3-6 per cent, or around $110 to $220 billion, larger, or the equivalent of around $3,000 to $6,000 for each Australian.
Increased skills and education does not just enhance productivity growth - it also boosts individuals' incomes.
At the individual level, the latest available ABS data shows that there is a benefit to individuals in full-time employment of approximately $100 per week for each extra year of education beyond compulsory schooling.
Those with post school qualifications are also able to work around 7 years longer than those without post school qualifications.
In other words, increased skills and education contribute to both higher productivity and higher workforce participation.
Despite this clear evidence at both a national and individual level, Australia has seen inadequate levels of investment in education and training in recent years.
When we came to Government, national investment in education had not kept pace with the rest of world. Public spending on education in Australia fell as a share of GDP - from 5 per cent of GDP in 1995 to a low of 4.3 per cent in 2004.
The most recent figures show Australia's public spending on education in Australia had risen slightly to 4.6 per cent of GDP in 2006, still well below the OECD average of 5.3 per cent.
The Government has already begun to turn around this gap.
In 2009-10, Australian Government investment on education is expected to be over $35 billion, an increase of around 0.5 per cent of GDP compared to 2006-07 levels.
This investment is critically important to addressing our long-term skills shortages.
In May 2008, the Australian Industry Group was warning that Australia faced a shortage of as many as 240,000 skilled workers by 2016.
Western Australia knows this problem well - before the global recession, several sectors of the economy and especially the mining industry were crying out for skilled workers.
The problem risks being made worse by the global economic downturn. 
In uncertain economic times, it's harder for tradies to take on apprentices - and to keep them on.
In 2008-09, as the global recession began to hit, the number of apprentices signed up in traditional trades dropped by around 10,000 over the previous year. By as much as 25 per cent in sectors like construction.
History tells us that it can take many years for training numbers to return to satisfactory levels after an economic downturn.
After the 1990 recession, it took almost a decade for apprentice commencements to bounce back.
Given the time lags involved in acquiring skills and training, the extent of Australia's skills shortages could worsen if, as expected, we experience substantial increased demand for skilled workers in the years ahead.
Supplying adequately trained and highly skilled employees for nation-building ventures like the Gorgon Project will be a major challenge in coming years.
The Gorgon Project is the largest resource project ever proposed in Australia and at its peak will create more than 10,000 direct and indirect jobs.
It is just one of around 80 planned or approved projects nationally.
And the West Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry estimates that the resources sector added 90,570 jobs across the WA economy from 2001 to 2008.
So we know that the demand for skilled labour is going to soar in the resource sector over the next decade.
And across the board, we know that the jobs of the future are going to require higher levels of skills and training than in the past.
Since coming to government two years ago, the Government has begun delivering a long-term education revolution to tackle skills shortages and prepare today's kids for the jobs and industries of tomorrow.
Despite the global recession, we have never taken our eyes off the ball for the long-term challenge of building the most highly skilled, highly trained, highly educated workforce for Australia's future.
We are committed to a revolution in the quantity of education investment and the quality of education outcomes.
The education revolution extends from an investment of nearly $1 billion in universal preschool by 2013 for children the year before they go to school, a time when investment produces enormous long-term returns - through to every level of education and training including vocational, university and research.
We have increased the Commonwealth's investment in all education sectors over a five year period by 50 per cent, compared to the previous five years.
The Government is increasing the Commonwealth's investment in school education alone to more than $62 billion in the current period from 2009 to 2012, compared to $33 billion in the period 2005 to 2008 - a nearly 100 per cent increase.
We are also undertaking major reform of the $6.4 billion vocational education and training sector in Australia.
VET is a major part of our education system, with close to 5,000 providers and 1.7 million students.
The Government is committed to an education revolution in the VET sector. Already we have provided $2 billion funding for 711,000 new training places over five years through the Productivity Places Program.
The Government will also soon introduce legislation to establish a national quality and standards regulator for the VET and higher education sectors.
Better national regulation will unlock key data about the performance of providers, the value of qualifications and the quality of teaching to give students the information they need to make the best choices.
We are also targeting our efforts where they can make the greatest impact. Here in Western Australia, we estimate that current training partnerships with the State Government will deliver 23,470 places for jobseekers and 52,009 places for existing workers over the next five years.
We are also tackling the specific problem of the fall in apprenticeships - and we are getting results.
Last year the Government committed to investing $145 million in our Securing Apprenticeships and Traineeships initiative to support out-of-trade apprentices and trainees, helping them to remain connected to the workforce and to maintain their investment in training.
To date more than $41 million has been paid to 22,600 employers supporting around 34,000 apprentices.
This investment supports the expansion of the national skills base by ensuring apprentices and trainees can complete their training.
We've also invested $20 million to support 4,000 pre-apprenticeship places - to give young people the experience they need to decide on a career in a trade.
And we have provided an immediate $80 million incentive for employers to take on a young apprentice.
Over summer this year, we are more than tripling the first year bonus to employers through the Apprentice Kickstart program.
This program increases the incentive for employers who take on traditional trades apprentices from $1,500 to $4,850 in areas on the National Skills Needs List - like carpenters, welders, cooks, electricians, joiners and hairdressers.
Apprentice Kickstart began on 1 December last year and will run until 28 February this year - or until 21,000 apprentices have commenced.
Today I can inform you that we are getting results.
Today I can confirm for the first time that most recent sign-ups for new apprenticeships, in December 2009, show an increase of more than 50 per cent compared to the same time last year - with 4,400 trade apprentices being signed up across Australia.
That is 1,500 more than in December 2008 and 1,200 more than in December 2007 - before the global downturn began.
And by last week, we had a total of 6,421 trade apprentices signed up. Apprentice Kickstart is a good choice for 2009 school leavers - it's a pathway for young Australians to a secure and exciting future. It's a good choice for employers - it's an investment in skills that will be vital during recovery.
This is government action at work, building Australia's future skills and future productivity.
This afternoon I have addressed a number of major national policy priorities that are important to building Australia's future.
Equally important is the work that Australians are doing every day to build Australia's future - from people working hard in their local communities, to those who serve Australia in uniform, to those who dedicate their professional life to medical research, relieving suffering and improving the lives of Australians.
Such contributions are not always well recognised - and that is why it is a good thing that 50 years ago this year, we established the Australian of the Year Awards - to recognise such contributions.
Western Australia's finalist for 2010 is a world leader of research into a disease that affects many older Australians and their families - Alzheimer's.
Professor Martin has made breakthrough discoveries in his research alongside Professor Colin Masters and a team of German scientists - the first significant breakthroughs since the disease was first diagnosed in 1906.
Professor Martin's work at the Sir James McCusker Unit for Alzheimer's Disease Research has helped make it possible to identify and treat Alzheimer's at an earlier stage, and he is currently working to develop an even earlier diagnostic blood test.
Professor Martin - we wish you the very, very best for your work and for next week's Awards.
Australians always embrace a challenge.
Whether it is medical researchers.
Or pioneers like Edward John Eyre who in 1841 arrived in Albany walking from the east across the Nullarbor Plain.
Or the men and women who have built this vast state into a powerhouse of the national economy.
We love a challenge.
And as a nation, we have some big challenges ahead.
But we can tackle them and in the decades to come, continue to be the envy of the world.
So with pride in what our nation has achieved, let's roll up our sleeves and get on with our work.
As we look with optimism towards the future, I ask you to raise your glasses as I propose a toast to Australia. 


I begin by acknowledging the first Australians on whose land we meet and cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
The Australian Government is committed to building Australia's future, building a stronger Australia, a fairer Australia, a fairer Australia for working families, and an Australia capable of confronting the great challenges of our future. A core part of building Australia's future is building the industries of the future, building the jobs of the future, and based on those industries and jobs, building the Defence Force we need for the future as well.
That's why today is a good day for Australia. Today is a good day for South Australia. Today is a good day for the Royal Australian Navy.
This shipyard which we are opening today is going to be the biggest Defence project ever undertaken in Australia. This shipyard will provide jobs for Australians and help build Australia's future, and this shipyard had been delivered on time and on budget.
With a project the size of this, $120 million, this is a substantial undertaking, so I congratulate all those who have been involved in the successful completion of this project. I'm advised that more than 50 companies, sub-contractors and suppliers were involved in providing materials, equipment and services to the shipyard between February '08 and November '09. At its peak, 400 people were working on this project, both on and off site, keeping the South Australian economy strong and supporting the jobs of working families.
This shipyard forms part of the Techcorp precinct here at Osborne, a State and Federal Government investment in our national industrial security. Together with the $320 million South Australian-owned common-user facility, this is a world-class shipbuilding and ship making facility, and I wish to publically acknowledge and thank the South Australian Government and the South Australian Premier for their strong and critical support for this project.
Techport includes a wharf, a runway, a dry berth, transport system and the ASC crane, which I'm advised would be Australia's largest ship lift and crane. This crane has a lift capacity of some 900 tonnes, and when it's assembled its jib height will be 90 metres. There are only 12 cranes around the world of this size.
All this technology will allow the precinct to deliver the most advanced surface combat ship ever built in Australia, the Air Warfare Destroyer. This $8 billion project is the biggest Defence project developed in our nation's history. The AWD will be a vital component of not just our future naval capability, but of Australia's future itself.
To secure our future, Australia will need a strong Defence Force and strong defence industry. Last year, the Australian Government looked to the future with the release of the Defence White Paper. The Government has committed to providing the men and women of the Australian Defence Force with the best possible equipment.
As I announced in Sydney last year that the launch of the Defence White Paper, that means delivering new, more powerful sets of military capabilities. Together, these capabilities are known as Force 2030, a force that will strengthen the defence of Australia for the next generation.
We, Australia, have a vast coastline, one of the three longest coast lines in the world. We have a vast maritime zone, and we have the third-largest maritime jurisdiction in the world. We have a vast maritime trade. We are, by definition, therefore, a maritime power, and we must have a capability to articulate that power.
We've made it clear that a strong maritime force is the key element of Force 2030. We are committed to a larger, heavier and more potent maritime force. As one important element of that we need advanced, modern, capable surface combatants, including, of course, the Air Warfare Destroyers. We need these surface combatants for the range of roles to establish control of the seas and project force into the maritime environment, including in support of our land forces.
Air Warfare Destroyers will be delivered in this project in 2014, '16 and '17. The first of these to be completed will be the new HMAS Hobart, and the fleet will be called the Hobart Class destroyers.
This destroyer will be the third HMAS Hobart. The first was built in the UK in the 1930s. She was a Modified Leander Class and served the Royal Australian Navy with distinction throughout the Second World War.
The second HMAS Hobart was a guided-missile destroyer built in the United States. She served with distinction in the Vietnam War and was one of the first ships to provide support and assistance in the aftermath of Cyclone Tracey.
But unlike the previous HMAS Hobarts, this third HMAS Hobart will have the honour of bearing not only the name, this great name, but also the honour of being built right here in Australia for the first time, and that shows the strength of our Australian defence industry.
We've come a long way since the first all-steel military ship was built in Australia in 1914 for the fledging Royal Australian Navy. The HMAS Huon was a River Class torpedo boat destroyer. She served in World War One in what was then called the Far East, or our words, the Near North, and later, of course, the Mediterranean.
She reminds us that from our earliest stages of Federation Australia has relied on naval power for our security and to play our part in international security. That is just as true today, when our Navy is on operation around the world, working against piracy, supporting our efforts in Afghanistan, flying the flag while working closely with our allies and friends.
It also true that to maintain our naval capabilities we need a world-beating defence industry here in Australia. The future of the defence industry can be seen in the innovative model that's being used to build the Air Warfare Destroyers. This is the most significant and complex Defence project being delivered using an alliance business model. The AWD alliance brings together the Defence Department and its commercial partners into a single consortium showing what we can achieve when we decide to work together.
ASC, the AWD shipbuilder, the Defence Materiel Organisation, the DMO, and Raytheon are working in close partnership and I'd like to acknowledge also the support of our other AWD partners, Navantia, Lockheed-Martin, and the United States Navy.
It's great to hear that the project is progressing well and that the AWD alliance is working as a team.
Building these ships here in Australia is good for the Navy. It's good also for industry, and it's good news for jobs. Apart from the hundreds of involved in constructing this ship yard, there are at present more than 800 hundred people working on the AWD alliance right across Australia and about 650 of them right here in South Australia.
Therefore, this AWD is a massive undertaking for the nation and for the State and it is a truly Australia-wide project, helping develop our national skills and infrastructure base. Steel from Port Kembla will be bashed into the hull blocks in South Australia, in Newcastle by FORGAS Group Australia and in Melbourne by BAE Systems Australia and the final ships will be assembled here in South Australia.
In so doing, we will have enhanced our defence industry and build a stronger national economy.
This project is also a chance for Australia to demonstrate our technological and ship-building capabilities to the world. The project will use some of the world's most sophisticated defence systems and components and a project of this magnitude means that Government and industry must work together in innovative ways to ensure success.
What we've put together is a cutting-edge alliance-based contracting strategy. Let me make it clear the Government is watching progress in this project very closely.
I congratulate the AWD alliance for the work that they are doing in building our next generation of Air Warfare Destroyers, and I would also like to congratulate ASC in today's opening of this facility. As a Government business enterprise, we pay very close attention to the work ASC does in this terminal here. I'm pleased that ASC's (inaudible) is here today.
The challenge ahead for the alliance is to deliver the AWDs on time and on budget. Having this capability as and when required will be critical to our national security. It will also demonstrate to the world that ASC and Australia as a nation is capable of competing with the best in the world in shipbuilding, and we have very high expectations of ASC. We expect it to be internationally recognised as an innovative and world-leading in ship building and ship sustainment enterprise. In other words, it must be the kind of company that others benchmark against.
We expect it to deliver the best value for money to the taxpayer, and we expect to build our Air Warfare Destroyers to budget, on schedule and to meet this capability requirement.
This new shipyard represents a substantial national industrial opportunity and I expect that the Defence Materiel Organisation, ASC and other companies involved in this project will look for innovative ways to use the opportunities presented by this shipyard.
On behalf of the Australian Government, I congratulate those who've built this facility, the companies and the alliance partners involved in this very complex project to build the Air Warfare Destroyers and Defence Materiel Organisation for managing this project.
As we enter the 21st Century, this century of the Asia-Pacific region, we are moving into a century of great strategic uncertainty, globally and regionally. Together, we must build the defence that our country needs for the 21st Century. Together we must build the naval force the country needs for the 21st century. And together we must build a strong Australia, strong in its economy, strong in its national security, confident of our place in the region and world, and that's why we need this capability here in Adelaide.
It is therefore with great pleasure that together with others here present today that we declare open this new ASC shipyard for Australia and the Australian Navy.
I thank you.


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
It's great to be back in the Top End to join with you in celebrating our national day. In coming days, people around the Northern Territory will be joining the rest of the nation in celebrating Australia Day, and given a recent survey by the National Australia Day Council found that 90 per cent of those surveyed would like to see more of our Indigenous culture included in celebrations, the Northern Territory is showing us how to do it.
The Executive Director of the Australia Day Council, Warren Pearson, says the Northern Territory is, and I quote : "...quite sensational as a model for the rest of the nation".
From small Aboriginal communities holding their own events, to the larger celebrations in Darwin, Palmerston and the Alice, to the footy match of the year - the Island of Origin - up in the Tiwi Islands, Indigenous culture is very much a part of the NT's Australia Day celebrations. Of course, there are various celebrations that also help create that shared sense of this being 'our' day as Australians - as well as:
     * The Australia Day Ute Run in Darwin;
     * The family bike ride and cricket games on Groote Eylandt;
     * And an event that seems to be emerging as a significant event in many communities - the Thong Throwing competition.
Australia Day provides an opportunity to reflect not only on the events of December but also on the past 12 months. This time last year, Australia was facing an enormous challenge with the worst global recession in 75 years. The good news is that the Territory, like our national economy, has been weathering the global storm.
Despite 2009 being a tough year, Australia rose to the challenge of the global financial crisis. As a nation, we have the fastest growth, lowest debt, lowest deficit and the second lowest unemployment rate when compared with the Major Advanced Economies. The Northern Territory's unemployment rate is below the national average at 3.2 per cent - extraordinarily, 0.8 percentage points lower than a year before.
Our response to the economic maelstrom has demonstrated what can be achieved when we understand that we're all in it together: governments of all persuasions, across political and state lines; businesses large and small; unions and local communities right across the nation. When our backs were against the wall, we all joined together to keep Australia strong, and that has made all the difference.
I am profoundly optimistic about Australia's future, but optimism is not the same as complacency. We still have major long-term challenges to tackle if we are to keep our economy strong and build a stronger and fairer Australia.
We can be optimistic because Australians have the determination and ability to seize the opportunities of the future, and tackle these long-term challenges. This week I am travelling across the nation ahead of Australia Day in a series of addresses on our need as a nation to prepare for our long-term future challenges.
Analysis of the long-term challenges facing Australia over the next 40 years is contained in Australia's Third Intergenerational Report, entitled Australia to 2050: Future Challenges, which will be released in coming weeks.
On Monday in Melbourne, I discussed how the ageing of the population over coming decades will result in slower economic growth unless we implement the long-term changes needed to move to a higher productivity growth path.
On Tuesday in Hobart, I discussed how the ageing of the population will also create additional long-term budget pressures for all governments unless we act to boost economic growth and therefore revenue growth, through boosting productivity on one hand, and on the other hand implementing our medium-term fiscal strategy to return to surplus.
On Wednesday in Adelaide, I discussed why I believe the decade ahead must be a Building Decade - and the importance of our investments in advanced 21st century infrastructure for moving to a higher productivity growth path.
Yesterday in Perth I discussed why, with an ageing population, this Building Decade must include the aim of building the best educated, best skilled, best trained workforce in the world - a workforce with the skills to work smarter and to be the engine room of the nation's long-term productivity growth.
Today I will discuss our determination to remove the barriers to work - to help more Australians to participate in secure and fulfilling work, so that we can increase levels of workforce participation and counter the effect of the ageing of population.
The Australia to 2050 report sounds the alarm bells on a major demographic change resulting from the ageing of our population. Today we are a nation of 22 million Australians, of whom 14 per cent - one in seven - are over the age of 65. By 2050, we will be a nation of 36 million Australians, of whom 23 per cent - one in four - will be over 65.
This will have a major impact on our economy and on government. The economic impact is that it will simply cost more to look after the needs of older Australians in health, aged care and age pensions. At the same time, a smaller proportion of Australians will be working, so tax revenues won't keep pace with those rising costs.
In 1970, there were 7.5 people of working age to pay tax and support every person over 65. Today, there are five. By 2050, that number is projected to drop to 2.7. So we will face higher costs yet slower economic growth - and that is the heart of the economic challenge of an ageing population.
The Government is determined to act now on the long-term challenge of an ageing population. The clear message of Treasury's intergenerational modelling is that our response to the ageing of the population must centre on enhancing productivity growth, and I will discuss today, removing barriers to participation in the workforce.
The Treasury analysis undertaken for the Australia to 2050 report shows that if average productivity growth was lifted back towards the 1990s mark of an average 2 per cent per year - up from the 1.4 per cent to which it declined in the decade just passed - this would produce enormous benefits. On average, every Australian man, woman and child would be $16,000 better off a year in 2050. Increasing productivity involves helping Australians work smarter, not harder - with the benefits of higher skills, advanced infrastructure, innovation and a seamless national economy - all key elements in the Government's commitment to building Australia's future and lifting productivity growth.
On Tuesday in Hobart I discussed a further dimension of the challenge posed by the ageing population - the challenge to the sustainability of government budgets. The task of meeting the challenge of the ageing population has been made more difficult by the aftermath of higher budget expenditure during the past decade, which has locked in a permanently higher spending base. During the growth period of the 2000s, the average real growth in government spending actually increased to 3.8 per cent, compared to 2.5 per cent during the growth period of the 1990s.
In response to this challenge, the Government has committed to a medium-term fiscal strategy that will help us manage the challenge of an ageing population by delivering a permanent structural improvement in Australia's public finances. The long-term consequence of the Government's medium-term fiscal strategy is that by 2049-50, the Budget outcome is projected to be around 3.5 per cent of GDP better off, or $130 billion in today's dollar terms. The Government's commitment to fiscal discipline builds sustainability into the Budget and is an important element in preparing for the challenges of the future.
On Wednesday in Adelaide I addressed the role of advanced infrastructure in enhancing long-term productivity growth. In explaining why I describe this new decade we have just begun as Australia's Building Decade, I made three key points.
First, economic evidence - including that cited in the Australia to 2050 report - clearly shows that infrastructure investment contributes directly to a more productive, growing economy. Second, and despite this fact, measures of Australia's infrastructure investment in recent decades show a trend decline in our infrastructure investment, contributing to choke points in infrastructure around the nation. Third, the Government has made infrastructure a national priority since coming to government, taking a leading national role for the first time in national infrastructure policy; establishing Infrastructure Australia to advise on the long-term planning of our infrastructure needs; investing a record $36 billion in transport infrastructure; and tackling regulatory reforms to remove the hurdles to increased infrastructure investment from the private sector.
Yesterday in Perth I discussed the importance of creating a more high-skilled, better trained workforce to move to a higher productivity growth path. Economic evidence - including that cited in the Australia to 2050 report - highlights that higher levels of education and skills not only increase earnings for individuals, they contribute to higher overall productivity for the nation in the longer term.
If we could boost GDP in 2050 by 1.2% through improvements related to education and training, that would amount to around $45 billion in today's dollars, or the equivalent of around $1,200 for each Australian. But despite this fact, Australia has not made adequate long-term investment in education in recent decades - in 2006, for example, we had a level of public investment for education below the OECD average, investing only 4.6 per cent of GDP compared to an average of 5.3 per cent. The Government has begun to turn this around, investing around half a percentage point of GDP more in education in 2009-10 than the levels of the previous Government and a drive for a qualitative increase in education outcomes at each level of the education system. The Government's goal is an education revolution, to build the best-educated, best-trained, most highly skilled workforce in the world.
In the past two days in Adelaide and Perth, I have spoken about the importance of enhancing productivity through building advanced 21st century infrastructure and prosecuting a revolution at every level of education. Today I want to speak about the other aspect of the long-term challenge posed by the ageing of the population - the need to address the projected decline in workforce participation.
I want to make three key points today.
First, the ageing of the population revealed by the Australia to 2050 report will result in lower levels of workforce participation in Australia - despite the fact that we anticipate an increase in workforce participation among working age Australians.
Second, to counter the effect of the ageing of the population on workforce participation levels, we must support the participation of working age Australians in the workforce. That means we must address the barriers to workforce participation associated with groups in the community where there are lower levels of workforce participation - including women with younger children, people with low educational attainment and those who suffer from persistent disadvantage.
Third, since coming to office the Government has already implemented major long-term initiatives to remove barriers to participation in work and build a fairer Australia. Those initiatives include establishing Australia's first-ever system of Paid Parental Leave.
We have begun the education revolution, to give more Australians the skills and training that will help them find rewarding jobs and stay in the workforce and we are acting to help those Australians most likely to be excluded from the workforce, including unemployed youth, kids growing up in jobless families, people in disadvantaged communities, the homeless, people with mental illnesses, people with disabilities and Indigenous Australians.
The Australia to 2050 report to be released in coming weeks will highlight the core challenge posed by the ageing of the population. The ageing of the population is expected to reduce the workforce participation rate from around 65 per cent now to around 60 per cent by 2049-50, resulting in slower economic growth and slower growth in family incomes.
The good news is that Australia is expected to make long-term progress in lifting participation among working age Australians. The participation rate among those aged 15 to 64 years is projected to increase from around 76 per cent now to almost 80 per cent by 2049-50. This reflects a range of factors, including higher levels of education outcomes in tomorrow's workforce.
However, such an increase in workforce participation will not be enough to offset the effect of the ageing of the population. A key lesson of the Australia to 2050 report for government policy is that we need to continue to take steps now to address the effect of the ageing of the population on workforce participation levels.
The steps we take now to expand opportunity for Australian children and youth today will yield benefits for participation, productivity and economic growth throughout their working lives over the next 40 years, to 2050 and beyond. After all, a child who is 5 years old today is likely to be in the workforce through to the 2070s. That is why expanding their opportunities now is so important to building Australia's future.
To address the challenges posed by lower levels of workforce participation in parts of our community, we must address the specific factors that contribute to exclusion from the workforce - factors that vary among different parts of our community.
In overall terms, Australia's participation rates are not low by international standards. However, parts of our community experience higher levels of exclusion from the workforce than is the norm for other developed nations, and it is clear that there is scope for lifting workforce participation among those groups, measures that will help counteract the effect of an ageing population over the decades ahead.
First, analyses of the causes of lower rates of participation among women have repeatedly highlighted the problem of accessing affordable childcare. While the working age female participation rate has increased from around 50 to 70 per cent over the past 30 years, Australian women's workforce participation during their peak child-bearing years reduces by a greater amount than for women in other leading industrialised countries.
For example, in 2008 labour participation rates for women aged 25- 44 years were more than 80 per cent in Sweden, Iceland, Denmark and Finland, compared with around 75 per cent in Australia.
Second, there is another set of barriers to work for older Australians who wish to remain in the workforce. Many suffer discrimination or find it difficult to access help to make the transition into different types of work that could improve their skills or prolong their participation in the workforce. The Government is committed to improving assistance for older workers who wish to continue working.
Third, low levels of educational attainment also contribute to lower levels of workforce participation, since the economic evidence demonstrates that those who do not achieve good education levels are far more likely to stay on the margins of the workforce, failing to find secure jobs. That is why the Government's is committed to improving access to education, quality health care and employment - because these measures can improve what the Treasury describes as our 'social sustainability, enhancing productivity and workforce participation.
Economic research shows that those who do not have a Year 12 education, or an equivalent non-school qualification, are 18 per cent less likely to be in the workforce than people that do.
Fourth, low levels of workforce participation are associated with multiple social disadvantage experienced in some parts of the community. This means that a substantial amount of the work we need to do to increase workforce participation is the same as the work we need to do to tackle social disadvantage in many parts of our community.
New analysis in the Australia to 2050 report shows that 2.6 per cent of Australians remained stuck in relative poverty, earning less than 50 per cent of median income levels, during the period from 2001 to 2006. That equates to more than 570,000 Australians excluded from the benefits of the mining boom years in Australia, despite the huge boost it provided to our national income, because the consequence of persistent disadvantage - and over time, a factor that contributes to the continued cycle of disadvantage - is that some Australians cannot find and keep a job.
If we can successfully increase the number of Australians in the workforce, we will also be a long way down the track in building a fairer Australia, and tackling the disadvantage that afflicts far too many Australians.
I note that today Patricia Faulkner, Chair of the Australian Social Inclusion Board, released the Board's first annual report on the extent, causes and impact of disadvantage in Australia. Echoing the findings of the Australia to 2050 report, the Board's report highlights the plight of Australians caught in cycles of persistent disadvantage.
The Government has identified six key groups in the community where there is entrenched disadvantage and where there is scope for increasing the level of workforce participation.
First are disadvantaged young Australians, such as those leaving school early and those unable to find secure employment.
Second are Australians who suffer from intergenerational disadvantage - the jobless families in which some 15 per cent of Australian children grow up. Research shows that children growing up in such environments are far more likely over the longer term to have lower levels of literacy and numeracy, weaker educational attainment, lower levels of workforce participation and ongoing exclusion from the mainstream of the economy and the wider community.
Third, in our cities and regions there are communities where there is a concentration of low incomes and disadvantage - a subject that the Treasurer wrote about in some detail in his book Postcode in 2006. For example, Canterbury Bankstown in New South Wales had a participation rate of 56 per cent in December 2009 and Wide-Bay Burnett in Queensland had a participation rate of 54.8 per cent - both more than 10 percentage points below the national average. Often, low income people living in these region have more difficulty participating in the workforce because of a lack of transport to places of work. Some 10 per cent of people with low incomes have difficulty accessing transport compared to only 1% of people with high incomes.
A fourth group of Australians who suffer social disadvantage are the homeless. More than 105,000 Australians are homeless on any one night in Australia, with more than 16,000 sleeping rough. Without secure accommodation, it is extremely difficult to sustain participation in the workforce.
A fifth contributor to lower participation levels is mental illness and disabilities. While mental illness is often episodic, and disabilities may only partial restrict a person's capacity for work, for many Australians these challenges can result in permanent exclusion from the workforce.
Indigenous Australians experience among the most acute social disadvantage of all Australians, and low workforce participation rates - especially those living in remote communities. This is a particular concern here in the Northern Territory. The unemployment rate among Indigenous Australians is around three times the rate of non-Indigenous Australia, with 16 per cent unemployment compared to around 5 per cent nationally on the most recent comparative figures, and just 26 per cent of Indigenous Australians have a non-school qualification, compared to 53 per cent of the rest of the community.
Just as we took decisive action to support families as we confronted the global recession, the Australian Government is committed to addressing the barriers to workforce participation experienced as a result of social disadvantage among each of these groups.
Some will argue that there is no need for governments to make active interventions to bring people into the workforce and that a government has no responsibility other than to allow people the freedom to choose how they live their lives. Such views ignore the reality for people who simply don't have the opportunities that so many Australians take for granted. They ignore the cycles of disadvantage associated with low incomes, low education, family dysfunction, concentration of social disadvantage in particular regions, mental illness, chronic health problems and insecure accommodation.
The reality is that Australians who are caught in cycles of disadvantage cannot make a simple decision to join the workforce and participate in economic and social life. Those who face multiple barriers to participation need additional skills, support and incentives to help them break out of the cycles of disadvantage and take responsibility for themselves and their families. These measures to tackle social exclusion target the group of around 5 per cent of Australians aged 15 years and over who experience three or more types of disadvantage, such as social exclusion, and by tackling these causes of exclusion, we can improve workforce participation and build a fairer Australia.
The Government recognises the challenge of acting now to implement the long-term measures that will reduce barriers to work and lift workforce participation.
The introduction of Australia's first-ever system of Paid Parental Leave from 2011 is a historic step that will significantly reduce barriers to workforce participation for hundreds of thousands of women. The Productivity Commission has estimated that the introduction of Paid Parental Leave could increase the average Australian woman's lifetime employment by around half a year - a significant positive impact. This measure will especially help lower-skilled and lower-income earners in industries where there are no paid parental leave schemes - women at far greater risk of dropping out of the workforce after the birth of children.
The provision of Paid Parental Leave will also help encourage their attachment to the workforce, since one of the conditions of receiving PPL is that prior to the birth of a child, parents must have been in employment for at least one day each week for 10 months.
PPL will operate in addition to the Government's increase to the Child Care Rebate from 30 to 50 per cent, which has already removed a significant barrier to employment for hundreds of thousands of parents. This has dramatically improved affordability of childcare for working families, with ABS statistics showing child care costs of parents fell by over 20 per cent after its introduction. Combined with the existing Child Care Benefit, the Child Care Rebate means that support provided to low income parents can now cover around 90 per cent of their out of pocket child care costs. This is a big leg-up for parents who are low income earners to re-enter the workforce.
It is long overdue. Australia has been one of only two OECD countries without a comprehensive Paid Parental Leave scheme, and it will provide a long-term benefit because one of the clearest findings of labour market research into working age people who are not in the workforce is that disengagement from the workforce often begins because of a lack of access to affordable childcare.
By increasing levels of educational attainment, the Government's commitment to the education revolution will also contribute to higher levels of workforce participation. The Government's early childhood education strategy involves an investment of almost $1 billion to achieve our aim of universal access to pre-school for four year olds by 2013. Educational research shows that participation in quality early childhood education programs can significantly improve long-term education and employment prospects for children, especially those most at risk of intergenerational disadvantage.
The Government is almost doubling the Commonwealth investment in schools over the four year period of 2009-2012, to achieve a target of lifting Year 12 or equivalent attainment from 75 to 90 per cent by 2015. We are investing $1.5 billion over seven years in the Smarter Schools National Partnership on Low SES Schools, to attract the best teachers to schools in low socioeconomic status areas, where young Australians typically lag at least one school year behind the Australian average. The Government is investing more than $700 million in TAFE and vocational education infrastructure, to help attain the goal of halving the proportion of people with skill levels below Certificate III level.
Currently, 43 per cent of the working age population has educational attainment of less than Certificate III level. The Government has adopted the ambitious target of reducing that proportion to 22 per cent of 20-64 year olds by 2020.
The Government has also invested $2.2 billion in higher education to enable an additional 50,000 new students to attend by 2013, with 20 per cent of undergraduate enrolments from low socio-economic backgrounds by 2020. This will contribute to the goal of 40 per cent of all 25 to 34 year olds having a bachelor's degree equivalent by 2025.
The Government is committed to building a future in which, to the maximum extent possible, all Australians participate in Australia's economy and society - by tackling social disadvantage. To do that, we have to give Australians the opportunities, resources, capabilities and responsibilities to learn, work, connect with others and have a say in community life. We need to break down the barriers that stand between some Australians and a job. We need to have as many people who can work in work.
That's why we have targeted young Australians most at risk of exclusion from the workforce through the Jobs and Training Compact. This Compact guarantees an education or training place for every young person under 25 who does not have a Year 12 qualification, or needs to upgrade their skills. In addition, the Youth Guarantee provides an incentive for young Australians to stay in education by requiring that every young person under 17 must be in school or in training in order to receive Youth Allowance or Family Tax Benefits.
The Government has also acted to minimise the impact of the global recession on communities most at risk, applying the lesson of the 1990s recession, where hundreds of thousands of Australians entered a long-term cycle of disadvantage and exclusion from the workforce.
In 2009, the Government implemented a Compact with Local Communities to assist areas of highest unemployment. This Compact has been backed by a $650 million Local Jobs Fund, to support local community projects that maximise local training and job opportunities. This has helped the most vulnerable communities to weather the storm of the global recession, and minimise the extent to which the downturn reduces levels of workforce participation. Despite the economic downturn, the level of workforce participation remains above 65 per cent, near record levels.
The Government is also committed to tackling homelessness, a problem closely related to exclusion from the workforce. The Government has committed to the ambitious, but achievable, goal of halving the level of homelessness by 2020. We have provided an additional $1.1 billion over four years to fund prevention strategies, long-term housing and support services, including services directly focused on helping individuals to reconnect with the workforce.
The Government is tackling disadvantage and low workforce participation among Indigenous Australians through its $4.6 billion long-term commitment to Closing the Gap on Indigenous disadvantage - addressing chronic disease, housing conditions, employment, education and service delivery. One of the most successful models that the Government is supporting in this area is the Clontarf Academics, which help young Indigenous people to achieve better educational outcomes while also developing their sporting talents, and next month I will be giving the second of my annual reports to the Australian Parliament on Closing the Gap.
All of these initiatives - and many others that I have not had the time to discuss today - are intend to assist in giving people the skills, incentives and readiness for work - supporting Australian jobs and building Australia's future. The Government's long-term blueprint to tackle disadvantage will be set out in greater detail next week by Julia Gillard and Jenny Macklin, with the release of our report, A Stronger and Fairer Australia - embodying our vision to build a nation that truly embodies the spirit of the 'fair go' for all.
One Indigenous Australian who represents the Australian spirit to many of us is the filmmaker Warwick Thornton - this year's Northern Territory finalist in the Australian of the Year Awards. Warwick's debut feature film, Samson and Delilah, has won international acclaim and is set to go down in Australia's cinematic history as one of our greats, and I understand Samson and Delilah has been shortlisted for the Oscar nominations in the Best Foreign Film category.
Warwick's passion for documenting the stories of his people will give our nation a great legacy and we wish him well next week when the Australian of the Year is announced.
The depth and breadth of the pool we draw from to select the Australian of the Year finalists reminds us that the Australian spirit is alive and strong in 2010. We are a resilient people who believe in the spirit of the 'fair go', who believe in helping their mate and who have in their DNA the spirit of the 'can-do', where nothing is too hard.
As we enter a new decade, there are significant long-term challenges ahead, but the opportunities are even greater, so let's take pride in what our nation has achieve and pride in what our nation has the potential to achieve in the building decade ahead in this, the land of the fair go.
So it's with great pleasure I ask you to raise your glasses as I propose a toast to Australia.


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
It's great to be back home in Queensland, and here in the Queensland Art Gallery -- an outstanding Brisbane venue.
Australia Day is a time when we can reflect on our nation and the year that is now behind us. In Queensland we remember those whose livelihoods were threatened by the devastating floods. You can throw anything at Queenslanders and they survive - indeed they thrive. There's an indomitable spirit, a 'can do' spirit, here that has seen this state, now entering the second half of its second century, go from strength to strength.
Since our last Australia Day, Queenslanders - like all Australians - have been confronted by the worst global recession in 75 years and together we are weathering the global storm. As a nation, we have the fastest growth, lowest debt, lowest deficit and the second lowest unemployment rate, when compared with the Major Advanced Economies.
We've shown how strength can be drawn from unity when governments at all levels; businesses small and large; local communities, unions and charity groups all work together, and I am optimistic that the decade ahead holds great things for Queensland, building on the achievements of the decade just passed.
In the past decade, Queensland outstripped national economic growth by a country mile, an average annual growth rate of 4.7 per cent compared to the national average of 3.2 per cent - the best performance anywhere in Australia, and Queensland promises to continue driving the national economy as we move into recovery from the global downturn.
On Australia Day 2010, we can be optimistic about our future, but can't afford to be complacent. We cannot ignore the very real challenges ahead.
This week I have travelled the nation ahead of Australia Day, speaking about our need to prepare for the long-term challenges of the four decades to 2050. To help guide that work, the Government has been preparing the Third Intergenerational Report, entitled Australia to 2050: Future Challenges.
The Australia to 2050 report, which the Treasurer will release in coming weeks, analyses the key long-term challenges facing Australia over the next 40 years. The Australia to 2050 report sets out the massive demographic change resulting from the ageing of our population:
     * Today we are a nation of 22 million Australians.
     * By 2050, we will be a nation of 36 million Australians - reflecting natural population growth and a continuation of migration trends of the past forty years.
     * Today, some 14 per cent of Australians - one in seven - are over the age of 65.
     * By 2050, some 23 per cent of Australians - one in four - will be over 65.
     * The ageing of the population is expected to reduce the workforce participation rate from around 65 per cent now to around 60 per cent by 2049-50.
The extent of that change is revealed by the dramatic change in the ratio of the number of people of working age (and paying taxes) to those aged 65 and over:
     * Forty years ago, in 1970, the ratio was 7.5 people of working age to every person 65 and over
     * In 2010, the ratio is 5 to 1.
     * And in 40 years' time, in 2050, it is projected to fall so far that there will be just 2.7 people of working age for each person aged 65 and over.
This creates a major long-term economic challenge, as Australia faces higher costs yet slower economic growth:
     * The Australia to 2050 report projects that average annual growth in real GDP per person is projected to fall to 1.5 per cent over the next 40 years.
     * This contrasts to an average increase in GDP per capita of 1.9 per cent per year over the past 40 years.
     * In other words, average family incomes will grow at a slower rate than in recent years. This defines Australia's long-term growth challenge: acting now, to counter the projected decline in economic growth in the years ahead; acting now, to enhance productivity growth and workforce participation - the clear message about what needs to be done in response to the ageing of the population set out in Treasury's intergenerational modelling.
By lifting productivity and participation, we can achieve a higher rate of economic growth and counter the effects of the ageing of the population:
     * The Treasury analysis undertaken for the Australia to 2050 report shows that if average productivity growth was lifted back towards the 1990s mark of an average 2 per cent per year - up from the 1.4 per cent to which it declined in the decade just passed - this would produce enormous benefits.
     * Our economy would be $570 billion bigger in 2050.
     * On average, every Australian man, woman and child would be $16,000 better off a year in 2050.
It is productivity growth that must play the central role in building Australia's future economic growth. Productivity is about how we use labour, capital and technology across the economy. It's about working smarter - rather than working harder, or working longer.
Productivity depends on all of us - workers, businesses and the Government - but the Government plays a vital role in facilitating long-term productivity growth.
To lift productivity we need broad economic reforms.
First, we can increase productivity by building advanced 21st century infrastructure:
     * According to IMF research, in developed countries like Australia, an increase in the public infrastructure stock by 1 per cent leads to an increase in output by around 0.2 per cent.
     * According to the Productivity Commission, improving the efficiency of Australia's energy and transport infrastructure could, after a period of adjustment, increase GDP by nearly 2 per cent.
     * This is the equivalent of around $75 billion or $2,000 per person in today's dollars, based on the figures in the Australia to 2050 report.
Second, we can increase productivity by building a highly skilled, highly trained workforce:
     * The Productivity Commission has found that improvements related to education and training - early learning, higher education attainment and increases in numeracy and literacy - could raise aggregate labour productivity by up to 1.2 per cent.
     * If we could boost GDP in 2050 by 1.2 per cent, that would amount to around $45 billion in today's dollars - or the equivalent of around $1,200 for each Australian.
Third, we can increase productivity through microeconomic reforms - such as the reforms the Government is prosecuting to build a seamless national economy:
     * The Productivity Commission found in 2005 that the National Competition Policy and related reforms during the 1990s increased Australia's GDP by 2.5 per cent.
     * Further microeconomic reforms can build on this achievement and continue to lift GDP and productivity.
     * The Government's commitment to tackle social exclusion can also contribute to increasing workforce participation and productivity growth by removing barriers to work and improving skills among the most disadvantaged Australians, such as Indigenous Australians, unemployed youth and the homeless.These measures will also help the 2.6 per cent of Australians - or around 570,000 - who were left out while the nation reaped the benefits of the mining boom in the past decade.
The other side of the challenge of the ageing of our population is the challenge it poses to the sustainability of future budgets. Unless we can achieve higher levels of productivity growth and workforce participation, we face either generating large, unsustainable budget deficits into the second quarter of the century, or needing to reduce government services.
The task of meeting the challenge of the ageing population has been made more difficult by the aftermath of higher budget expenditure during the past decade, which has locked in a permanently higher spending base:
     * During the growth period of the 2000s, the average real growth in government spending actually increased to 3.8 per cent.
     * This compared to an average 2.5 per cent annual real growth in spending during the growth period of the 1990s.
In response to this challenge, the Government has committed to a medium-term fiscal strategy that will help us manage the challenge of an ageing population by delivering a permanent structural improvement in Australia's public finances. The long-term consequence of the Government's medium-term fiscal strategy is that by 2049-50, the Budget outcome is projected to be around 3.5 per cent of GDP better off - or $130 billion in today's dollar terms.
The Australian Government is acting on the challenges facing Australia. We took strong, early and decisive action in response to the global economic crisis to support jobs and working families here in Queensland and across the nation, but we always kept our eye on the ball, directing some 70 per cent of our economic stimulus towards nation-building infrastructure, infrastructure that will advance the long-term challenge of enhancing productivity and workforce participation.
Across Australia, our Nation-Building for Recovery Plan involves a $77 billion investment. The total stimulus to the Queensland economy amounts to $11.7 billion, through payments to support working families and investment in medium- and longer-term infrastructure.
Our first action was immediate stimulus of the economy through targeted bonus payments to families, pensioners and individuals. We did this to ease the pressure on households struggling with the global recession, while supporting economic growth.
In Queensland, this meant:
     * $1.3 billion in tax bonus payments to around 1.5 million individuals;
     * Around $700 million in stimulus payments to families, and $790 million to pensioners;
     * $511 million in Back to School bonus payments for more than 550,000 children;
     * $255 million in Single Income Family Payments for almost 290,000 families, covering more than 560,000 children; and in addition to these measures, some 560,000 pensioners in Queensland have received substantial permanent pension increases of up to $32 per week - helping make a big difference for those struggling with cost of living pressures.
We also helped 40,034 Queenslanders into their first homes by the end of November last year, through the First Home Owners Boost.
The Nation Building Economic Stimulus Plan also invests in medium-term, shovel-ready infrastructure that supports jobs during the economic downturn.
The Building the Education Revolution Program is the biggest schools modernisation program in Australia's history:
     * We're investing $16.2 billion in 9,526 schools across the country.
     * Through the National School Pride component, we're investing $1.3 billion in over 13,000 small scale and minor refurbishment projects. This includes $241 million in 3,700 projects here in Queensland.
     * Through the Primary Schools for the 21st Century component, we're investing $14 billion in over 10,000 new libraries, multipurpose halls, and classrooms. This includes $2.7 billion for 2,235 projects here in Queensland.
     * And we're investing over $800 million in 537 new science and language centres for secondary schools, including $200 million for 127 science and language centres here in Queensland.
Second, we have the Social Housing Initiative - the biggest Commonwealth Government investment in social housing ever:
     * We're investing $5.2 billion in over 19,000 new social housing dwellings. This includes $1.1 billion for over 4,000 new dwellings here in Queensland.
     * We're investing $400 million in 70,000 repairs and maintenance jobs for social housing. This includes an $80 million investment in 22,000 projects here in Queensland.
     * And we're investing almost $250 million in 800 new defence housing dwellings. Almost half of these dwellings will be right here in Queensland because we recognise that defence housing needs in this state are particularly strong.
Third, we are transforming homes across the country with the Energy Efficient Homes Package:
We've already paid out over $1 billion towards almost 800,000 ceiling insulation jobs. $350 million of that investment has been for over a quarter million homes here in Queensland.
We've also paid out $134 million for over 84,000 solar hot water rebates, including $24 million for almost 15,000 here in Queensland.
And finally, the Nation-Building Economic Stimulus Plan includes almost $1 billion in transport and community infrastructure:
     * We're investing $150 million in 607 Black Spot projects to improve safety on our roads. This includes a $30 million investment in 93 projects here in Queensland.
     * We're investing another $150 million in almost 300 Boom Gates projects, to improve safety at rail crossings. This includes $43 million for 66 projects in Queensland.
     * And we're investing $550 million in 137 projects through the Regional and Local Community Infrastructure Program - including a $30 million investment in 19 projects here in Queensland.
     * We have also supported local communities through 37 Jobs Fund projects in Queensland, generating or retaining a total of 1,129 jobs, 908 traineeships and 765 work experience positions.
The Government is also committed to building long-term economic infrastructure that will support productivity growth in coming decades. This long-term infrastructure is the transport, communications and energy networks that will drive economic growth for future generations.
That is why we are investing $36 billion in transport infrastructure across the country over the next five years. It is an unprecedented transport infrastructure investment. We've doubled the roads budget. We've quadrupled the rail budget. We're investing in ports for the first time.
Here in Queensland, we're investing $8.6 billion, which includes:
     * $2.6 billion for duplication and safety works on the Bruce Highway - one of the longest and most important sections of the national road network
     * $2.5 billion for the upgrade of the Ipswich Motorway - one of Brisbane's most important arterial routes
     * And $365 million towards the Gold Coast Light Rail project that will transform one of the fastest growing regions in Australia.
Modern, efficient, and safe transport infrastructure is critical to making sure Queensland is one of the best places to live in the world.
We are also committed to the infrastructure of the 21st Century - high-speed, optical-fibre broadband. That is why we have established a company to invest $43 billion in a National Broadband Network with speeds of 100 megabits per second, taking us from the back of the pack among developed economies into the modern era.
It will plug Queensland into the global economy. It will transform the way we live and work. It will underpin our future prosperity.
Preparing for the future is also about preparing for the low-carbon economy of the future. That is why we have created the $4.5 billion Clean Energy Initiative to support new green infrastructure, including:
     * The $2.4 billion Carbon Capture and Storage Flagships Program to support construction and demonstration of large-scale projects.
     * The $1.6 billion Solar Flagships Program to support construction of large-scale solar power stations.
     * Together, these massive infrastructure investments in transport, communications and energy are about setting us up for growth for decades to come.
The Government is investing in an education revolution, to give Australians the skills, education and training that will help lift productivity growth and workforce participation in the long term. That starts with early childhood education for the youngest Australians:
Over the next four years, $16 billion will be invested in Early Childhood Education and Child Care - an increase of more than $1 billion. That is more than double the investment made over the previous four year period under the previous government, and $13.1 billion of this will directly assist parents with the cost of child care. In Queensland, we are providing:
     * More than $700 million each year to help parents with the cost of child care;
     * $11 million to create six early learning and care centres;
     * $75 million for 10 integrated Children and Family Centres in Queensland - targeted towards Indigenous families; and
     * $252 million to help all Queensland kids access 15 hours of kindergarten in the year before they start school.
I've already spoken about how we are investing in the biggest school modernisation program in Australia's history. We are also investing record amounts in our schools, to give the new generations of Australians access to the best education possible. Nationally, we will invest more than $62 billion in school education from 2009-2012, compared to $33 billion in the previous four year period.
In Queensland, that means a 138 per cent increase in education funding:
     * We have already allocated $54.8 million for around 54,661 computers in 522 Queensland schools.
     * We've also provided around $73 million provided for 28 Trades Training Centres in schools to help address skill shortages in traditional trades and emerging industries.
This Government has increased investment in funding for vocational education and training by 64 per cent to $4.1 billion in 2009-10 - and providing a total $14.8 billion over 4 years to 2012-13.Nationally we have provided $2 billion for the Productivity Places Program to fund 711,000 places over five years. Already we have enrolled over 112,000 job seekers enrolled in the program, with over 60,000 having completed their training.
We've taken action to support apprenticeships, to avoid thousands of Australians missing out on training due to the economic downturn. Under the Apprentice Kickstart program launched last month, we have tripled the incentive for employers to take on a young apprentice. Since it began on 1 December, new sign-ups for apprentices have soared by more than 50 per cent compared to the same time last year, and by last week we had a total of 6,421 new trade apprentices signed up - of whom 1,114 were Queenslanders.
The Government has begun the process of reforming our health and hospitals system to meet the long-term challenges of the ageing of the population. We have made substantial new investments in health care here in Queensland and across the nation, delivering an increase of around 29 per cent in funding for Queensland over a four year period. As part of the National Healthcare agreement, the Australian Government will deliver $64 billion in health and hospitals funding over five years. This is an increase of more than $20 billion, or 50 per cent over the last agreement. Queensland will receive around $12.5 billion from this agreement.
Nationally, we have delivered $750 million to take pressure off our emergency departments. Queensland's share is $147 million, to deliver upgrades at Prince Charles, Logan, Redland, QEII, Ipswich, Caboolture, Bundaberg and Toowoomba Hospitals, and of the $600 million we are investing to reduce elective surgery waiting lists across the country, Queensland has so far received a total of $57 million.
That is made up of:
     * $28 million to conduct additional surgeries - with Queensland delivering 5,928 additional surgical procedures, well above its target of 4,000;
     * $29 million to expand elective surgery capacity and commission additional operating theatres.
As part of the $3.2 billion health infrastructure package in the 2009-10 Budget, Queensland will receive a total of $480 million towards hospitals and medical research infrastructure. This includes:
     * $250 million to expand Townsville Hospital;
     * $40 million for the Smart Therapies Institute;
     * $104 million for an Oral Health Centre in Brisbane; and
     * $76 million to extend Rockhampton Hospital.
     * These are important investments in the future of our health care system and the future health of our nation.
Australia Day is a time to reflect not only on the future, but also on past achievements. It is also a time to acknowledge the great achievements of individuals in building the modern Australia of today.
On each Australia Day, we recognise those individual contributions through the Australian of the Year Awards, which turn 50 years old this year, Australians who have served their community and made us all proud of our nation.
The 2010 Queensland finalist, Dr Chris Sarra, is a leader in Indigenous education. A world-class educator, Chris hails from Bundaberg and is the youngest of 10 children. In the late 1990s, Dr Sarra took on the challenges of Indigenous education as the Principal of Cherbourg State School in South East Queensland. His 'Strong and Smart' philosophy and his leadership led to dramatic improvements at the school. He now heads the Stronger Smarter Institute, which is transforming Indigenous education with its focus on high expectations, quality relationships and community engagement in schools.
This is nationally important work, so I'm sure you'll join me in wishing Chris the very best for his work and for next week's Awards.
The strength of the finalists each year for the Australian of the Year Award reminds us that the Australian spirit is alive and well here in Queensland in 2010: the 'can do' spirit; the spirit of a 'fair go';and a spirit of compassion, embodied in our nation's response to disasters at home and abroad - from last year's floods and bushfires here in Australia, to the tragic earthquake in recent days in Haiti.
That spirit is everywhere in this great land of ours, qualities that can make us all proud this Australia Day.
And so I raise the toast: To Australia.


I acknowledge the first Australians on whose land we meet and whose cultures we celebrate as the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
It's good to be back home. It's good to be back home on the Southside. It's good to be back home in Brisbane, good to be back home in Queensland. It's good to be back home for Australia Day and the lead up to it.
One of the things that we've done here in our local community over, more than a decade now, these last eleven years is honour our local volunteers and in the last week I have been in Melbourne, I've been in Hobart, in Perth, in Adelaide, last night in Darwin and arriving here. What stuns me, whichever part of Australia I go to, is the sheer magnitude of our national volunteering effort.
As we have had Australia Day receptions at each of the State and Territory capitals, to be able to spend time with those who give of their all, through their local community organisations, through their local churches, through their own charities, through their own sporting organisations, this is an extraordinary reminder of how much our nation is built on the shoulders of those who volunteer.
Had we no volunteers, I shudder to think what our country would be like. Our volunteers are the heart and the soul and the sinew of so much that Australia has become these last couple of hundred years.
You here on the Southside are part and parcel of that tradition.
I'm most familiar with this community more than any other community in Australia, and what I know from your work here in this community is how much people depend on it; how much they depend on whether the meals on wheels is going to deliver tomorrow; how much they depend on the physiotherapy services being delivered at Balmoral Uniting Community Care; how much they depend on whether, in fact, there's going to be a smiling face and a helping hand from their local church, their local parish council and their local parish communities; how much they depend on whether in fact the sporting gear is going to be there on Saturday morning, rolled out ready for those who are going to participate in their community sports; to know that someone is going to be there to set up the Guide's Hut for that morning, to make sure that the young girls who come there and to participate in the wonders of guiding are going to be properly supported and similarly for scouts.
None of this happens by magic. It all happens because you, the women and men of Australia, decide to put your shoulder to the wheel to make it happen and you make the wheels of our community turn around.
There's a huge difference between how we do things here and what I've seen in so many other countries around the world. Where either this level of community life just doesn't happen or there's an expectation that some abstract arm of government is going to try and make it happen. Here we have a remarkable, vibrancy to our community life and you are the heart and soul of that here on Brisbane's Southside.
So the reason I have done this proudly as your local member these last eleven years and as the last two or three years as your Prime Minister is because it is a fantastic thing to do, to be able to come together to honour those who volunteer to make our community work.
The values that are alive in volunteering are the values more broadly which makes Australia the great country that it is.
I was reflecting on this most recently in Perth and in Darwin. There are two things about Australian people - one is that we have this remarkable spirit of, so call it, the 'can do'. Here's a problem, rather than sitting around and moping about it, how do we fix it? How do we make it better? How do we solve the problem. What are the practical thing we can do to change this from here to there, to make a real difference.
The impressive thing about Australian's everywhere is that they don't sit around and mope about it. They say how about we roll our sleeves up. How do we fix this problem? Whether it's cleaning up from the devastation of the Victorian bushfires, more than a century ago dealing with Cyclone Tracey which I spoke of in Darwin yesterday or whether it's the very simple fact of dealing with the challenges which arise day-to-day.
Australians have a 'can do' spirit.
You see it in business; you see it in our universities; you see it in our community organisations; you see it when the challenges are great and we choose to bind together to harness the great individual and entrepreneurial spirit of Australia into a common national purpose.
There's another part of Australia's spirit also.
We have the spirit of the 'can do' but we also have the spirit of the 'fair go'.
The spirit of the 'fair go' is so much who we are, as Australians.
A fair go for all - it doesn't matter where you've come from; it doesn't matter whether you've grown up rich or poor; whether you've grown up in the country or the city; whether you've been to the finest private schools, or the humblest country small schools. Everyone should in this country, be given a fair go.
And the great thing about Australia is that that has been etched into our soul for more than a century - it is who we are.
And it is not just us attending to our own. It is also that sense of a 'fair go' that we have for others abroad.
We've seen it for example in our response to events such as the Boxing Day Tsunami - now more than 5 years ago.
This was an extraordinary tragedy on our doorstep, and Australians, one and all, in partnership with the Australian Government, in partnership with the international community, saw the devastation on our doorstep and decided to extend a helping hand as part of the fair go for our neighbours. Because when natural disasters hit, those folk need a helping hand.
And most recently we've seen it with the Australian response also to the extraordinary devastation in Haiti. This has challenged many Australians as they have seen the devastation on their television sets of an evening.
Already, the Australian Government has provided assistance in the form of funding, comprising $10 million to meet urgent and immediate humanitarian needs like shelter, food, water, sanitation and medical assistance, and $5 million for long-term reconstruction assistance following UN assessments of the requirements.
But we can and we will do more.
Today I can confirm that we have received a request from the Government of the United States to provide a specialist team of air traffic controllers from the Australian Defence Force.
Overcoming logistical obstacles is one of the keys to making sure the assistance that is being provided actually gets to the people of Haiti.
And making sure that their airports are operatively effectively is key to that again.
Making Haiti's airspace and airports effective, safe and useable is crucial to the overall humanitarian effort. And we, as Australia, will help make a difference through this part of our relief effort.
The US Government has made this request for our assistance in Haiti, and the Australian Government today, agreed to that request for assistance to help the people that have been affected by this appalling natural disaster.
The Australian Defence Force is now in the process of preparing a team that will be deployed of specialist air traffic controllers and they will be deployed to Haiti within the next week.
As ever, Australia stands ready to provide whatever further logistical and other humanitarian assistance is necessary for the reconstruction of that country that has seen such enormous devastation.
It is part and parcel of the 'fair go'.
A fair go for people who cop it from an event of nature, for which they are not responsible, who cop it and therefore need help. And Australians stand ready, as ever, to assist.
Over the past week I have been speaking also about the challenges which face our nation in the year ahead, and in the decade ahead.
If I reflect back on where we were a year ago - the nation and the world was staring down the barrel of the worst economic crisis the world has faced since the Great Depression.
I don't know if you've followed your newspapers over the last 12 months but what we've seen in countries and economies around the world is one falling over after the other like nine pins, unemployment reaching double digits in the United States and in countries in Europe, in Spain something like 15 to 20 per cent unemployment, as the entire global economy has been affected by the global financial crisis. What we have seen is economic growth collapse, what we've seen is unemployment rise, and what we've seen therefore is families and communities devastated around the world.
Here in Australia we decided to make a difference, we decided to make a difference together. We've drawn together those great spirits of the 'can do' and the 'fair go' to make a difference here in Australia.
So what we did in harnessing this tradition of the 'can do' and 'fair go' was how can we as government at all levels together with the business community, together with the trade union movement, together with the church and charitable sector make a difference as this economic tsunami was making its way across the world. It had no respect for national borders, no respect for countries, no respect for political ideologies, one country after another falling victim to its horrific effects.
What we did as the Australian Government was say the private sector is about to come under massive pressure, it's time for Government to step up to the plate. That's why we decided to invest through our national economic stimulus strategy. It's part and parcel of conservative economic management that when the private sector retreats, government should step up and fill the space, otherwise employment just falls through the floor. That's what we did.
And that's why we're in the process of building for example the largest school modernisation program this country has ever seen. Every primary school here on the Southside you will see buildings rising from the dust, and you see it not just across Southside, but right across Brisbane, right across Queensland, right across every state of Australia. Every suburb I visit, every town I see, we are seeing new classrooms being built, we are seeing new language centres being constructed, new science centres being built as well, and on top of that 21st century libraries, multi-purpose halls often for use by the wider community as well where halls may not be available.
The sum total of our effort has been this - a year on the report card for Australia is as follows - We have uniquely among the major advanced economies not fallen into recession.
Australia is the only economy of the major advanced economies not to go into recession. Australia in 2008-2009 is the only one of the 33 advanced economies in the world to generate positive economic growth. Australia only second in terms of the lowest level of unemployment across the major advanced economies, and doing all those things with the lowest debt and the lowest deficit.
But none of this could have been possible had the Australian Government not been able to work in partnership, together, in the Australian spirit with State Governments, Labor and Liberal right across the country, local governments, all 565 of them right across the country, to make a difference on the ground. And to make a difference on the ground also with local chambers of commerce, with local businesses, with local trade unions, with local church and charitable organisations, and what we've seen is the Australian spirit at work, recognising that we are all in this together and therefore making a difference together.
So the report card that we have generated for the nation a year on, with the rest of the economies around the world still in such diabolical trouble, has been a good one, but it's been a good one because the nation has pulled together in the face of the worst economic crisis the world has ever seen since the Great Depression.
We as Australians should draw great encouragement from that and great encouragement for the future.
Our challenges for the future cause us also not to be complacent about the future. What we have done in the year past, that is solid, but the year ahead will present its own challenges, the decade ahead presents its own challenges, the century ahead presents its own challenges. I am confident however that as Australians pulling together, as Australians acting as an Australian family, as an Australian national family, putting our differences to one side when it comes to the great challenges we face, we can make a difference.
Our history is full of examples of us making a difference, deploying the spirit of the 'can do', the spirit of the 'fair go', applying it to the practical challenges of the moment and making a difference at home and abroad, making a difference for our nation, and making a difference here in our local community.
None of that would be possible were it not for you, the volunteers of Australia. None of that would be possible were it not for each and every one of you as part of our Australian volunteering community here in Brisbane Southside.
So as Prime Minister of Australia I say thank you; as your member of Parliament I say thank you; and as a fellow Australian I say thank you as well.


I begin by acknowledging the first Australians on whose land we meet and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history. I thank you very much for that uniquely Sydney welcome to country.
We've just been reminded that a couple of hundred years ago a bunch of fellas arrived in eleven ships just across the way there. It is remarkable that we are here to celebrate this occasion today. The reports are that after the eleven ships of the first fleet landed here at Sydney cove, that there was, and they had discharged their human cargo, that the captain, General Arthur Phillip then proceeded to provide an address to the assembled throng.
This was then followed by less than ceremonious events. As I'm told from the historical record that large slabs of the male and female convicts then abandoned to the Rocks behind here and engaged in what could only be described as a Bacchanalian celebration. There is a moral to this story. If you're going to provide a public lecture, as the Captain Governor of New South Wales, make sure it inspires their attention. Had it been a more policy laden speech by Arthur Phillip, I'm sure that the convicts in question would have sat down for a robust seminar, on Benthamite penal reforms to the British penal system of the late 18th Century.
That was the first week, but those of you who followed your early Australian colonial history will know that the first fleet, Arthur Phillip having delivered his human charge here safely and intact, there was then a Royal Commission convened by the British Admiralty because the first fleet had cost too much. Ever heard that story before? It had cost too much. So the Royal Commission was held and its conclusions were, in fact, that indeed it did cost too much and that as a consequence, if there was to be a second fleet, it should be put out to, wait for it, private tender.
There was a normal conduct of a private tender bid, competitive neutrality was assured by British Admiralty at the time. Submissions were lodged and of course the one which came in, on time and under cost won the contract. It just happened that is was a West African Slaver. The history of the second fleet therefore unfolds because one of the curious elements of the contract, and all New South Wales and Federal public servants here present, pay attention to this, was what I described a perverse price incentive. The price incentive was this, whatever food you've got left over at the end you get to keep. Think about the incentive. So as a consequence, one third of the human charge of the second fleet died in passage.
My forebear Thomas Rudd was one of those who scrambled ashore, in 1790, or about there. He was a person of no particular repute and, at that stage at least, no particular ill-repute but I'll return to that in a minute. He was engaged in career development. He was a London dustman and had been accused by the parlourmaid of nicking the fair lady's shoes which had been stuck on the back porch for cleaning. The Old Bailey, at the time, that great and impartial system of justice which we all uphold to this day, sent him to transportation for seven years; two years on convict hulks at Portsmouth and then here for the nightlife at Sydney Cove in 1790. Well he served his time, was emancipated in 1795 and made his way back to England by China. This was a formidable voyage at the time, travelling back through Cantong and Southern China in the days of the mid-Ching court. Obviously chose not to take up Chinese. He arrived back in London and in 1799 reoffended. It takes a singular talent to be transported to New South Wales twice.
I challenge all those historians here from New South Wales to find me any convict in New South Wales who has been sentenced here twice, and so he came again.
I always like the transcript in the Old Bailey on his second trial where the constabulary was asked by the 'beak' of the old Bailey whether they knew Thomas Rudd and the immortal words then ensued, 'Ah yes, m'lord we know him well'. I think that may have prejudiced the outcome. Off he came for nicking a bag of sugar this time for another seven years. He was finally emancipated in 1806 and then decided to stay. He was then given an allocation of land out at Campbelltown. If you actually go to the cemeteries in Campbelltown they are literally, planted well with my antecedents. All this leads to, I think, the ultimate transition to respectability because I'm told by the historians and I can't quite confirm it myself, that in 1824 finally there was a letter to the editor of the Sydney Gazette, co-signed by Thomas Rudd, together with other citizens of Campbelltown asking for more capital works in Campbelltown.
All of which goes to prove that the pathway between criminality and respectability can be achieved within a generation. Therein lies the story of Australia at large and I'm sure, this convict colony as well. I'm from Moreton Bay settlement so, same up there.
My wife, of course, is of impeccable free-settlement stock. She brings balance to this union and she is of Scottish heritage and, not only can celebrate being of free-settler stock, but then having been born in the only free-settler colony or State of Australia, namely that of South Australia. So Therese brings respectability to what would otherwise have been entirely criminal enterprise.
There's one footnote to all of the above which is that I was told today, and again I stand to be corrected, that on the convict lists for the second fleet two names are listed in 1790 - one Thomas Rudd and one William Abbott. Now, I know not, if there is any connection between that said Abbott and this said Abbott. If there is I wonder how those two gentlemen got on onboard; eight months together on ship with not a lot to eat.
You know the great thing about Australia is the spirit of the country. Our times change, our challenges change but if you look across the continued history of this country of ours I see a spirit which unites us all; a spirit which has these characteristics - firstly the spirit of 'can do'; a spirit which says here's a bunch of challenges, here's a bunch of difficulties, here's a bunch of problems, what can we do about it to make better?
We are by instinct a very practical people; we are by instinct a mob who see a challenge and says well how can we get past it? We're not given by temperament or predisposition to sit around and moan about things. We much prefer to get on and see what can be done about things. That is a great spirit. We see it alive in our entrepreneurialism; we see it alive in the great individual achievements of our nation, the very practical things that are done and out there in business; in commerce; in science and innovation and in the rest of human and individual endeavour.
The other great spirit alive in our country is the spirit of the 'fair go'; this is written into our Australian DNA; it's part and parcel of what has been grafted into our soul and spirit of Australians, and that is a habit, or view of life, which says I cannot be indifferent to the condition of others. I must do something to help out my fellow Australians. I must do something to help out my neighbours when they're going through tough times. I must also do something to help out those elsewhere in the world who may now be the victim of unspeakable natural disasters. That spirit of the 'fair go' is there informing our history as well. That spirit of the 'fair go' and that spirit of the 'can do' I see alive in all those people whom Kristina and myself and Therese and Ben have shaken hands with this evening. Each of you representing great achievements in business; in science; in innovation and through our community and church and charitable sectors also those who have been out there extending the hand of human friendship to those in need.
So as Prime Minister of Australia could I say one simple thing to you all - those of you who have given of your own to make the lives of others better, thank you.
Without your contribution, Australia would be a radically different country.
The spirit of volunteering is what makes this country different. I said, in my own community yesterday in Brisbane, that if you were to think about what Australia would be like tomorrow if everyone ceased as of midnight tonight to volunteer, this country, literally I believe, would fall apart.
We rest on the shoulders of so many thousands, tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands of volunteers who actually keep the fabric of our society and our community going. As the elected leader of this country, and when I travel abroad, it is the thing that gives me greatest pride in reflecting on the achievements of this nation, Australia.
In the last 12 months since I spoke in the lead up to Australia day last year we had been through an enormous set of challenges. It goes by many names. The global financial crisis; the global economic recession; the global meltdown, but across the world we have seen the greatest financial crisis, an economic crisis, metered out to the global economy since the Great Depression of '29 and '32.
If you look across the world you will see one economy after another falling like nine pins; unemployment going through the roof; economic growth collapsing and with tens of millions of people being added to the unemployment queues around the world, and each of those, not just a statistic, but a human being whose family's affected, whose life is affected, whose community is affected, whose company is affected, whose nation is affected.
The great story of 2009 is that as Australians we chose to make a difference. We chose to do it differently. We chose to come together as one in the face of this huge national and international challenge.
On the Government's part, we put our step forward with something called the National Economic Stimulus Strategy and we applied particular measures. We invested $77 billion into the economy; 70 per cent of which went into infrastructure; 29,000 infrastructure projects now underway across the country.
Jobs for today but building the infrastructure we need for tomorrow.
Here in New South Wales $21 billion invested through the National Stimulus Strategy; $16.2 billion in our school modernisation program across the country; here in New South Wales, thousands of school projects rolling out. In social housing, $1.9 billion in New South Wales to build 6,300 new units of public housing; 31,000 repairs and maintenance to social housing; in energy efficiency investing in 333,000 homes for ceiling insulation, and 55,000 solar hot water.
But what's it all mean? These are the practical things that we did, practical things which are of use today in providing jobs and employment and engagement for small business and providing still for apprenticeships today, but critically building the economic and educational and social infrastructure we need for tomorrow.
Jobs for today, helping small business today while building the infrastructure we need for tomorrow.
Again, my message to you is what Government does is one thing - doing it in partnership with the entire national community is something else; bringing together the innate sense of togetherness we have as a nation is what made the difference.
We could not have done what we did were we not in active partnership with every State Government, Labor and Liberal across the country; with every one of the 565 local authorities in Australia; Labor, Liberal, independent, Calathumpian all working together. We could not have achieved this if we were not working together with businesses who chose, often courageously, to keep people in work rather than to put them onto the unemployment queue. We couldn't have done this had the unions not adopted a policy of restraint during a year of great difficulty for everybody and we couldn't have done it were it not for the community sector, out there, aided by the churches, supporting those who still felt the rough end of unemployment and the impact on the family home and on the family budget.
So my simple message about where we've been this last year is this. By working together and coming together as a nation we made a radical difference.
The report card for Australia is outstanding.
One. One country unique among the major advanced economies worldwide did not go into recession; that country is Australia.
Two. Unique among the 33 countries who are the advanced economies of the world, only one country grew its economy in 2008-2009; that country is Australia.
Australia; the second lowest unemployment of the major advanced economies and with the lowest debt and lowest deficit.
None of the above achievable unless the country and the governments of the country worked together.
So much for the year past.
My second point to you today is about the challenges we face for the future. There is no point looking back on 2009 and being in any sense complacent - no point whatsoever.
The core challenge I've been speaking of around Australia this week as I've sought to host receptions such as this in every state capital and territory capital of the country is to point to our core economic problem for the future - not just this second decade of the 21st Century but for the 21st Century at large - and in a nutshell it is this; it is the ageing of our population
Consider this simple statistic.
The share of our population over the age of 65 will increase from 12 or 13 percent of our total population today to nearly 25 percent of our population in 2050 - from 1 in 7 of our number to 1 in 4 of our number. Our overall population will rise but the aging of the population will rise even faster.
The second statistic I want you to think about is this - we will have a smaller proportion of working Australians supporting those who are over the age of 65 who will need, of course, increasing support for health care, for aged care and for various forms of retirement income. 40 years ago, in 1970, there were 7.5 people in the workforce for every one person over the age of 65 - today that number is about 5.5 people in the workforce for every one person over the age of 65.
By 2050, that number will drop to 2.7 people in the workforce for every person over the age of 65. Here my fellow Australians is the core challenge
Two things flow from this - the first is that because we are going to have a much larger number of older Australians, it follows that those older Australians are going to command more services in health and hospitals and aged care and also in retirement income. On average, hospital expenditure on people aged 65 to 74 is currently double that of anyone aged 55 to 64. For our oldest Australians, those aged 85 and over, spending increases to almost five times that spent on people aged 55 to 65.
Treasury analysis which will be contained in the Government's upcoming Australia 2050 report points to the fact that over the next 40 years real health spending on those aged 65 and older is expected to increase around seven-fold. Real health spending on those aged 85 and over is expected to increase 12 fold.
This is a product of the increasing age of Australians overall and secondly the fact that within innovations in pharmaceuticals and medical technologies and the rest the cost of treating each individual aged Australian will rise as well. That is our first problem.
The second problem is, of course, the proportion of Australians in the workforce generating the tax revenue to support those services will become less.
So what does Australia, in response to this 2050 report that we will release soon, do about the challenges for the future when it comes to this aging of our population.
One further thought we should bear in mind is the impact on our budgets.
Forty years ago, Australian Government spending on health equated to 1.2 per cent of Gross Domestic Product.
In 2010, Australian Government health spending equates to 4 per cent of GDP, and the Intergenerational Report projects that it will rise to 7.1 per cent in 2050
In dollar terms, that's an increase of over $200 billion by 2050 - and equates to an increase in average Australian Government health spending per person in real terms from $2,290 today to $7,210 in 2050.
These are figures we should all reflect on.
Rising health and hospitals spending is already having an impact on state budgets.
States and territories have experienced growth in health spending of around 11 per cent per year over the past five years.
This contrasts with growth in state revenues of around 3 to 4 per cent a year.
Rapidly rising health costs create a real risk, absent major policy change, as state governments will be overwhelmed by their rising health spending obligations.
If current spending and revenue trends continue, Treasury projects that the total health spending of all states will exceed 100 per cent of their tax revenues, excluding the GST, by around 2045-46 - and possibly earlier in some states.
The NSW treasury has estimated that spending on health will almost double as a share of the NSW total Budget - from 30 per cent today to around 55 per cent in 2032-33.
These are challenging statistics, but it is important the nation becomes familiar with them, because we must do something about them.
Without reform - States ability to provide the services they currently provide will be significantly strained.
That is why 2010 must be and will be a year of major health reform.
What are the options which we are now therefore confronted with as a result of rising health costs on the one hand, and proportionally the number of Australians working declining on the other, in turn generating less economic activity and less taxation revenue.
Well, there are three strategic options for Australia.
One is to cut health costs; cut health spending; reduce aged care and reduce payments for people entering retirement income.
Those in favour of doing that, raise your right hand.
You'll be surprised to know that in Melbourne, in Hobart, in Adelaide, and Perth and Darwin and even in Bris-vegas yesterday, no one raised their hand at that particular option, so why don't we just park that one for the time being.
Option number two; long-term unsustainable budget deficits. In other words allow our health expenditure to increase; do nothing in terms of the economy; see the proportional delivery of tax revenue to the Commonwealth and State coffers remain constant and simply budget finance, budget-deficit finance it into the long-term future.
That's not sustainable either for the simple reason that ultimately you cannot sustain budget deficits indefinitely. You cannot do it. It doesn't add up.
Thirdly what you can do is this - you can increase health expenditure but on the condition you do something else to increase economic growth by increasing economic growth by two things which are available to us; increasing the workforce participation of our continuing workforce through things like improved childcare, paid parental leave and other such measures and helping those outside the workforce under the age of 65 enter the work force but secondly and most critically, by boosting the productivity of our workforce.
It is not to make people work longer that we speak of, it is to enable people to work smarter by drawing upon the most up-to-date technology and the most up-to-date skills - that's what makes the difference, in boosting our productivity growth.
Which brings me to my final point, what can we do about lifting productivity growth for the future?
Well there's no magic to this, but here again are a stat to think about from the Government's upcoming 2050 report.
It warns us about what happens if we don't lift our productivity growth from where it is at the moment, which is 1.4 per cent per year. Back in the 90's following the big economic reforms of the 80's and 90's we began to lift productivity growth to 2 per cent a year - in the noughties, that is the decade that's just unfolded, it has actually slipped back to 1.4.
You might think that's a small difference, but when you work it out across the entire scale of the economy, it is not. It makes a huge difference.
If we in the future can raise it back to 2 per cent, where it was, by 2050 our economy will be more than one half a trillion dollars bigger than it would otherwise be, in current dollar terms, on average every Australian man, woman and child, would be $16,000 better off, in current dollar terms, but most critically, our taxation revenues would also grow to fund the health outlays that we need to fund for the aging population.
So that's our practical challenge.
And therefore why all of our energies of the nation, when you strip away all the political song and dance show, has to be focussed on this core productivity agenda.
So what are the things that make that work?
Three measures - one is investing radically in the infrastructure of the 21st century, so our workforce can be more productive in how it works.
Secondly by investing in the education, skills and training of our workforce radically, what we call an education revolution, so that people can bring better and sharper skills to bear across the work force to be more productive at the things that they do. And thirdly to pull the arms of excessive regulatory intervention out of the road of small business and business to allow business to get on with the job of generating growth.
These ladies and gentlemen are the measures we're currently embracing through infrastructure investment we are working hard through organisations like Infrastructure Australia: the Building Australia Fund, for the first time providing national leadership in developing a national infrastructure plan, $36 billion of national investment.
In NSW, a 123 per cent increase in transport infrastructure; $1.5 billion for the Hunter Expressway; $600 million for the Kempsey Bypass; $1.8 billion upgrading the rail networks in the freight system of this state. Now on top of that when we roll out the National Broadband Network, an investment of up to $43 billion, this state representing a third of the Federation will receive the bulk of that investment - altogether with one objective, to increase the state-of-the -art of our infrastructure here and across the country to enable our workers to work more efficiently in the future.
Secondly on skills, what are we doing on that front?
Nationally we've doubled Australian Government investment in education; $33 billion we were investing in the four years prior to 2008, and we're now investing $62 billion; in NSW the 126 percent increase in education investment in this state; all necessary for the future right across the spectrum of early childhood education, through school education, through TAFES and training, all the way through to what we do with our universities and research.
That also goes not just to the quantity of what we invest in education but to the quality of what we do as well. This is a matter of some controversy, but our view is that fundamental to delivering the improvements in education is making our schools the best they can possibly be - that's the aim behind the MySchool website, which is being launched later this week by the Deputy Prime Minister Julia Gillard.
Our view is that parents are hungry for more information about their kids' schools. Our view is that the parents deserve more information about their kids' schools, and we intend to give it to them, in partnership with the Government of NSW and partnership with governments elsewhere in the country.
And by giving parents information that they deserve, we can build a better education system and build a stronger economy for the future with greater productivity. Giving parents this information gives them the ability also to demand improvements in the quality of their kids' schools and indeed make decisions about which school will best meet their child's needs. For the first time this information will be consistent and robust across all schools and readily available to all parents - this will ultimately drive improvements across the whole system, or to put it differently, the rising tide of high performing schools will lift all boats as parents demand the best for their kids. And one thing we know for sure, school performance is critical to the development of our nation's human capital which is in turn the driver of productivity growth.
This then is what we're thinking to do on lifting productivity; investing radically in infrastructure; investing radically also in what we're doing in schools.
But can I say also to our friends here in NSW - we also recognise that improvements now need to be made in health as well. That's why it is critical that we partner with our friends in the states and territories to assist in shouldering that burden. We in Canberra have increased by 50 per cent health funding nationally over the first five years, including $20.5 billion in a new healthcare agreement here in NSW. And for the very first time can I say to each and every one of you, the Australian Government is now investing directly into the building of hospital infrastructure around the country. Beginning here also in NSW with nearly a $100 million investment in the Nepean Hospital redevelopment in Western Sydney; as well as investments in cancer research at the RPA Chris O'Brien Centre and at the Garvan St Vincent's Campus, a $70 million investment.
So there's nothing magical about this; it's doing what you can now to increase productivity growth with a long-term view about how you boost what we can generate by way of growth and tax revenue from the economy by investing in infrastructure, investing in skills, but certainly, not ignoring the needs of the health care system now but investing in those as well.
To conclude, each and every one of you here represent achievement in your respective fields; what we do on Australia Day in just two days time is also recognise the Australian of the Year, through the Australian of the Year Awards, which have been now running for 50 years.
Environmental campaigner Jon Dee has inspired millions of Australians to make positive environmental and social change.
He's this year's NSW finalist in the Australian of the Year Awards.
As co-founder of Planet Ark, Jon has successfully shown people and business how they can reduce their impact on the environment.
He's also been a driving force behind such initiatives as National Recycling Week, National Tree Day and campaigns to phase out plastic bags and incandescent light bulbs.
We wish Jon and all the finalists from around the nation the very best ahead of Monday night's announcement.
Ladies and gentlemen as we approach Australia Day let us reflect with pride upon what we have achieved here in this great nation Australia, and what those of you who have done to make a difference in your organisation. And as I said again in remarks in the last several days, think of your sporting organisation, think of those of you who are running the local Girl Guides Hut, think if tomorrow or next Saturday no one shows up to make sure the hut is open; think if no one is out there to roll out the cricket wicket, or nets; think if no one's there to make sure the basketball court is attended; think if you're from St Vincent de Paul if no one is there to serve meals at the Matthew Talbot centre; think if tomorrow there was no one there to assist in providing the support for a family with no meal to put on the table the next day; and each of your organisations, so many represented in this room today reflect that Australian spirit of the 'fair go', and the Australian spirit of the 'can do'.
Thank you for coming to this reception here this evening, you are welcome guests here on Australia Day. We decided to do something different now - in the past when Australia Day came we expected the nation to come to Canberra. I've taken the view that the nation of Australia is wider than the immediate perimeter of Lake Burley Griffin, as a consequence we are now taking Australia Day to each and every state and territory capital. It has been a wonderful privilege for myself and Therese to be able to spend time with each of our community leaders from across this great land of ours, Australia.
I thank you and I wish you all the best for Australia Day 2010.
I don't know about you but I'm pining for a drink. I have one further, formal, solemn task to perform and that is to ask you to raise your glasses in a simple toast to our great land, Australia


I begin by acknowledging the first Australians, on whose land we meet and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
This last week I've been travelling around Australia and the reason I did that was because I thought it was important that rather than expecting the nation to come to Canberra for Australia Day, instead we took Australia Day to the nation. So in each of the state capitals, where I've met many of you in the course of the last week, it has been a great experience to spend some time with some extraordinary Australian achievers.
And whether it's Melbourne or Hobart, the time I had in Adelaide and Perth and Darwin and Brissie and Sydney last night and now here in the nation's capital, it is not just you who are represented here today as finalists in the Australia of the Year, but literally tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands of other volunteers right across the country.
It's an extraordinary Australian story. At each of these receptions, just sitting down quietly, even if only for a few moments, talking to someone from the local Meals on Wheels organisation, the local Girl Guides, the local St Vincent de Paul, the local entrepreneurs, the extraordinary stories of achievement and of voluntary effort.
What I've spoken about in part during the week is the spirit which animates us as Australians, and I've tried to summarise it in two ways. I've summarised it as the spirit of the 'can do'. That is, Australians who look at a problem and say to themselves 'I can fix that', and they go about fixing it.
And then there's equally the great Australian spirit of the 'fair go'. That is, when I see my brother or my sister in need, then they deserve a fair go and my job is to go out there and do what I can to give that to them.
And if you look across the great story of Australia, both as it's being written today and as it's been written for centuries past, these two great spirits, that of the 'can do' and that of the 'fair go', essentially hold together the narrative of our nation. The great stories of individual achievement; the great stories of entrepreneurial breakthrough; of scientific innovation; of sporting excellence - these are things which inspire us, which make us proud to be Australians, as we have among us a culture and a habit and an animating spirit which says 'we can break through this and make a difference.'
And at the same time, this great, I think, ennobling attitude of Australians, where we have the sense and the spirit of the 'fair go' etched deeply into the Australian soul, if someone tried to go surgically extract it from the Australian DNA it wouldn't work because it has been so deeply entrenched there, so that when any of us are confronted with our fellow human beings and fellow Australians in need, or people who are our neighbours in need, our first impulse as Australians is 'what can we do to help.'
If I reflect on the year that's passed, you see these great spirits that animate our nation at work in some of the extraordinary challenges we faced together in 2009. I think, particularly, of the Victorian bushfires barely a year ago, and I think of the unspeakable tragedy which we saw unfold in those fires and the unspeakable sorrow which descended on so many families, and so many shattered lives, and at the same time to see also, out of the ashes emerge immediately these two great Australian spirits - 'what can I do to fix this', and 'how can I help to give my fellow Australian a fair go.'
And so whether it was truckies jumping in their rig in Perth and saying 'I'm headed to Melbourne' - and they did - folk in Far North Queensland navigating their way around their houses in a boat as the floods unfolded there to make sure that they could get to the post office to make a donation to the Victorian Bushfire Appeal, or farmers across the country who leant their hand with the immediate tasks of stock management, of how you dealt with the very practicality of fences which had been burnt to a cider, and how could you rebuild, through to the Lions Clubs and the Rotary Clubs and the rest, and I have so many pictures of people's faces in my mind, as those there, sitting quietly, Australian sense of humour, handing out a sausage, handing out a hamburger, providing a well-catered evening meal, in the midst of utter, complete devastation, and that so much sums up who are as an Australian mob, and it's an empowering story, and it is something of which the nation at large should be proud.
The other story, an unfolding story, which comes to mind in the year just past, is the extraordinary work of our men and women in uniform, and it is not just in the battlefields of Afghanistan, though that is a deep and bloody conflict, it is the work being done on the ground in Timor; the work being done on the ground in the Solomons; the work being done on the ground in Sudan; the work being done on the ground in the Sinai; the work being done on the ground in Australia today wearing a uniform of Australia, confronting extraordinary difficulties; in the battlefields of Afghanistan, dealing with extraordinary threats to human life and therefore enormous achievements of courage and compassion in the field of battle.
This, too, is part of the Australian story, as it's been for so many generations before us.
And so, these two great spirits of Australia, what we can do together, spirit of the 'can do' and the spirit of the 'fair go', are also reflected in these extraordinary lives gathered here today.
Some of you may have been puzzled as you all came in the door why I knew a little bit about something of what each of you have been doing, and that's because I sat down and had a bit of a read on my way up from Sydney this morning, but when we have:
     * John Dee, co-founder of Planet Ark, showing people in business the ways they reduce the impact on the environment;
     * Patrick McGorry, leading international researcher, clinician, advocate of youth mental health reform and the executive director of Origin Youth Health;
     * Chris Sarra, extraordinary work at the Cherbourg school in my own state of Queensland and now heading the Stronger Smarter Institute to transform Indigenous education;
     * Ralph Martins, a world leader in Alzheimer's research, who, by the way, does endorse a couple of glasses of red wine as one of the best preventatives, in moderation, and I'll let him prescribe later in what degree of moderation for each of you - he'll be taking consultations in that corner;
     * Julian Burton, having suffered life-threatening third-degree burns to his body after the Bali bombings, since 2003 was driven to found the Julian Burton Burns Trust, solely committed to the prevention and care and research associated with burns injury;
     * Bruce Englefield, the contributor and one of the major voices for the future of the Tasmanian Devil, and saving the Devil;
     * Patricia Easteal, extraordinary work as a human rights advocate, as a legal reformer, and one passionately committed to the cause of eliminating domestic violence;
     * Warwick Thornton, who has told through film the extraordinary story of Samson and Delilah, a beautiful story, a tragic story, but a story which has not just been conveyed to Australians at home but been honoured abroad, and, as I'm advised today, one of the nine shortlisted films for best foreign film at this year's Oscars;
     * Pierre Johannessen, who informs me that he's not Danish but Norwegian in origin, as a young Australian, basketball being his passion, establish the Big Bang Ballers in Bangladesh and now Nepal, Afghanistan and the Philippines, catering for the needs for 8,500 kids and more, using basketball as a means to give hope and opportunity in young people's lives;
     * Liam Jurrah - what an extraordinary footballer, from the central Australian desert to being conscripted by the Australian Football League and acting as an inspiration for the game and for his people, and for young people in the Territory;
     * Danielle Catanzariti, the little one - Hi down there. Extraordinary emerging from Murray Bridge, South Australia, at the age of 10 in the Murray Bridge Players and Singers to have been invited by Cate Blanchett to perform in a play, most recently Blackbird, and in 2008 receiving the AFI young actor award;
     * Brad Smith, the irrepressible, ever-smiling entrepreneur and youth advocate from Tassie, named Australian Young Entrepreneur of the Year in 2008, but as he said to Therese and I as he came in this morning, his passion - using creative opportunities, business opportunities, to show kids a different path in life rather than resorting to drugs;
     * Jean Madden designed the street swag, out now to 13,000 folk to help those sleeping rough;
     * Trooper Mark Donaldson, a story writ large in our nation already, but if you read his military citation as I did the Christmas before last, before it was my honour to dispatch it to Her Majesty the Queen, it read like a page of military gallantry which we've associated with wars past, but one undertaken by him in a war present and in the great tradition of Australian comradeship in the field of battle, putting his mates' lives first and his own life last - Trooper Donaldson, Victoria Cross;
     * Jack Manning Bancroft, 24 years of age, CEO of the Australian Indigenous Mentoring Experience, passionate about what he can do with young, Indigenous Australians in working out from Sydney and beyond;
     * Larissa Brown, who founded the Centre for Sustainability Leadership - important work;
     * John Buckingham, here in Canberra, passionate about what can be done surgically and in other fields to assist women suffering from breast cancer, and with 13,000 women diagnosed each year with breast cancer, important and extraordinary work;
     * Alan Langworthy, through Power Corp, delivering solar and renewable energy to many remote communities and saving both the cost and the carbon emissions impact of diesel-generated power;
     * Maggie Beer, the irrepressible culinary icon extraordinaire and her work in so many fields, including helping Australians in making informed food choices, author of many books, and now, critically working with Stephanie Alexander to promote the Kitchen Garden Foundation;
     * Bill Mollison, the father of permaculture, one of Australia's true icons;
     * Ron Rankin, a volunteer member of Surf Lifesaving Australia for over 46 years;
     * June Butcher, founder of the Kanyana Wildlife Rehabilitation Centre, which now has 140 volunteers caring for over 2,000 animals each year;
     * Lyn Thorpe, using her surgical theatre skills to help people in need of life-changing surgery, whether it's cataracts, cleft pallet or other disfigurements in developing countries;
     * Nigel Dick, instrumental in establishing Odyssey House in Victoria, a residential rehabilitation program for young people with drug and alcohol addiction, and having worked with it to help more than 8,000 clients over 30 years;
     * Paul Pisasale, the irrepressible mayor of Ipswich in my own state of Queensland, with a passion for helping young, local, unemployed people and behind the formation of Young Unemployed People of Ipswich, which I presume, Paul, goes by the acronym YUPI, is that right?
     * Rhonda Parker, from WA, Boyup Brook, a small, rural town where she is so much the driving force behind the community fabric and the community contributions which keep that community going, having put it on the map with the fourth largest country music festival in the country;
     * Mike Coddington; Murray Bridge Country Fire Service Brigade, eight years rising to become brigade captain and increasing the membership from a mere 8 to, he tells me, not 24 according my brief, but 30 as of today;
     * Delwyn Polden - she and her husband Rick have taken hundreds of children into their home on both and short and long-term care and used private coaching of music to help kids in difficulty;
     * Julie Grehan, here from Canberra, has set up Daryl's Den, a craft club for people with disabilities;
     * Norma Higgins from the Territory, from Katherine, who set up a market in the community of Katherine to help local producers have an opportunity of selling their product locally;
     * Ronni Kahn, founder of OzHarvest who has now briefed me personally and in detail on what OzHarvest does and silly me for confusing it with Food Bank, but I've been properly reprimanded and I won't get it wrong - but take seriously this core challenge: of all the food which is served in restaurants and through catering businesses around our country each day, how do you harvest that food immediately and within hours have leftover, surplus food delivered to those centres which can use that food for meals for people in need then and there. A terrific idea now servicing 163 charities;
     * Kevin &amp; Rhonda Butler, fencers extraordinaire - not in terms of the Olympic event, but the Australian event putting fences up and responsible for putting together a team of some 3,000-plus volunteers rolling up 700km of burnt fencing from the Victorian bushfires, and building with that team over 500km of fences for the farm properties which have been affected.
That's taken a little time, but I wanted to do it. I wanted to do it before the nation's media so that each of these stories could be summarised, albeit briefly, because the few words I've used to summarise each person's achievements are simply a short hand description of what has taken years, decades, and in many cases entire lifetimes to shape and form and to bring into being.
But the spirit that animates Australia, this spirit of the 'can do', this spirit of the 'fair go', is writ large in each and every one of these stories, of your lives, which I have read out just now, and that is why you are here, because Australia Day committees across our country, in our six states and our two territories, have reflected long and hard on literally hundreds and thousands of nominations from across the country and concluded that these achievements, your achievements, are worthy of our nation's recognition.
So as we approach Australia Day 2010, let's celebrate.
This sense of determination and resilience that we have as Australians is well captured in our national anthem. It's well symbolised in our Australian flag, our national flag which we celebrate under for Australia Day today and into the future.
This is a great day. Enjoy it. Enjoy being with us here at The Lodge in Canberra. Enjoy also the fact that your achievements inspire many others to follow in your path.
Therese and I honour each and every one of you as Australia's achievers of 2010.
I thank you.


Thank you, Aunty Agnes, for that wonderful and warm welcome to your country, and I also begin by acknowledging the First Australians on whose land we meet and whose cultures we celebrate across Australia today as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
This Australia Day, the 222nd in our settled history, I'd to tell you the story of three young Australians. I'd like to do that because I think their stories speak directly to the great spirit that is Australia, the spirit that's animated so much of our nation's history, and the spirit that inspires us as together we build the nation's future, and that spirit is Australia.
Last night I spoke with Jessica Watson. It was morning in the pitching seas off South Georgia, somewhere in the South Atlantic. She had just rounded Cape Horn, as you do, her boat's main mast had hit the water four times the day before, and the day before that her parents told me they lived through the anxiety of being phoned by search and rescue because Jessica's emergency beacon had gone off.
Jessica Watson is no ordinary young Australian. She is an extraordinary young Australian, and some 5,000 nautical miles west of Cape Town she wanted me today to wish you all a very happy Australia Day.
I asked young Jess if there was any message she wanted to pass on to the nation. Her message was simple. Her message was live your dream - live your dream. But before we see a squadron of 16 year olds set sail around the world, let me also add what she also said was important for her - other practical ambitions, including finishing school, getting a driver's licence, very useful, I would have thought, in the Southern Atlantic, and - wait for it - getting a skipper's certificate, which I thought you might have needed before you went to the South Atlantic, but not for our young Jess. Jess Watson is a remarkable young Australian.
The second story I'd like to tell you about is a young Australian barely half Jessica's age. This is a story of little Bailey Lackas, 8 years old. I went and saw Bailey at his home just outside Wandong last week. Bailey lives there with his mum Sandra in a home they've made out of the back part of an industrial shed on their 20-acre farm on which they breed Welsh mountain ponies. Bailey showed me his cubby house, his guinea pig Dale - Hi, Dale - and his favourite horses and foals, including his own little pony, Silk.
Bailey, like Jess on the high seas, is a little battler. He refuses to be bowed by the violent forces of nature. One year ago, Bailey lost his dad, and Sandra her husband, on Black Saturday, as Steve tried valiantly to defend the family home.
One year later, little Bailey is a mile a minute about all the things he wants now to do with his life. Leaping on horses 10 times his size, his arm in a sling from a fall that he'd had the day before, this pint-sized little Australian hero, his passion is to ride like the wind and nothing will stand in his way. And for the record - Bailey also says that he'd like either to be a mad scientist or Prime Minister. One may be a precondition for the other, but I digress.
The third story is about a young Australian I met for the first time last year. He's with us today. This is the story of Trooper Mark Donaldson. A boy from country New South Wales, Mark new a lot of family tragedy in his early life, but supported by Legacy and by family and friends, Mark decided to make his career the Army, and what a career he has made. When I read his citation for gallantry the Christmas before last, I had to read it again and again, and then ask Therese to come in and read it to me for a third time. It was and is and remains and will forever be the stuff of legend.
Let me paraphrase: with total disregard for his own safety in a 2-hour long engagement between his own detachment and a significantly larger and well-armed Taliban force, he took the initiative, deliberately drawing fire from the enemy to enable his nine wounded mates to be taken to safety, and if that was not enough in a day's work, he then returned across 80m of exposed ground, again attracting the most intense and accurate of enemy fire in order to rescue the company's Afghan interpreter and carried him back to safety.
We have read of Simpson and his donkey at Anzac. This, too, is the stuff of modern legend, and so Trooper Donaldson became Australia's first winner of the Victoria Cross since Vietnam, and yesterday was named Young Australian of the Year.
Well done, mate.
You know something? These are great young Australian stories, when often our young people get an unfair rap. But what brings these stories together?
What brings these stories together is what they say about the spirit of Australia: a spirit of adventure; of imagination; of individual achievement; a spirit that acknowledges adversity; that wrestles with adversity; and that triumphs over adversity; a spirit that looks after your mates, your neighbours, and even those you do not know.
This is the Australian spirit, the spirit of the can-do country; the spirit of the country of the fair go; this great spirit that is Australia; the spirit of Australia that says there nothing irreconcilable in a country and a culture that celebrates equally the outstanding achievements of individuals and the extraordinary acts of selflessness from this land of the fair go. That is the magic that is Australia.
It is this great Australian spirit that enables us to build the great nation that is the envy of the world. This is not the luck country. It's not the lucky country. This is a country that has been built brick by brick, one generation building on the foundations of those who came before us, and being built through blood, sweat and tears; a country fashioned by clear vision; a country of steely pragmatism about what must be done next; and a country with the courage to take the big decisions, the big, the long-term decisions to break with the past when necessary to secure our future; the country that gave women the vote before practically any other country on Earth had given women the vote; the country - thank you - the country that in 1967, by an overwhelming majority, decided to eliminate the racial distinctions that had previously existed in our constitution; a country that had the courage and the imagination to embark on the great post-war migration to build our future; the country that had the imagination to build the great, nation-building projects of the post-war years, including the Snowy Mountains Scheme; a nation that half a century later abandoned the protectionism of the past and had the courage to build the modern economy of the future; a country which in just the last year alone has bonded together to confront the single greatest crisis faced by this economy since the global depression of 1929-32. That is the country of imagination, of courage, and of determination and of spirit.
And it is this attitude, this spirit, this preparedness to take the big decisions when big decisions are needed, it is this spirit which must shape our future as well, and the big challenges which lie ahead for us all, the huge challenges which lie ahead for us all, and the huge challenges which lie ahead for the planet itself.
This, my fellow Australians, is not the lucky country. This is the country which we have built together, which our forebears have built together, with imagination, with passion, with vision, and with compassion.
And you today join this family of Australians, and you today join this nation of Australians, those of you who become citizens today.
As Prime Minister of the country I welcome each and every one of you to our national fold, to our national family. You are a welcome addition to our number. You enliven us. You enrich us. You expand our imagination. You challenge our complacency. You add to our diversity. You are so much our future, building on the great traditions that have built this country over generations. You are part of our future.
And together with the 16,500 like you right across Australia today, as Prime Minister of Australia I welcome each and every one of you to become members of this Australian family.
When I think of 16,500 Australians, that's bigger than the town of Nambour. That's where I grew up in Queensland. So we're adding one whole new, big, Nambour-plus today, and can I say, long may it continue.
Today, as we celebrate this, our national day, let us be inspired by the great stories of inspiration of our young Australians - the stories of Jess Watson, of young Bailey Lackas, 8 years old, and of Trooper Mark Donaldson.
Long live this great country, Australia.


I begin by acknowledging the first Australians, on whose land we and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
Thank you, Janette, for that wonderful and moving welcome on behalf of the Ngunnawal people.
Well, welcome to our home, The Lodge here in Canberra. This being our home I can now extend an invitation to those of you who wish to get a little bit closer out there, outside, there's room for about 100 folk up here if you wanted to get in a bit closer. Don't feel compelled, but the police will soon move you in.
Listening to the great welcome to country before from the representative of the Ngunnawal people reminds me afresh of the extraordinary privilege we have in Australia in sharing this vast continent with the first Australians. Those who have had their life, their culture, their community, their being, their art, their dance continuously in this continent for 30,000, 40,000 and 50,000 years - that's a long time. So for those of you who come as members of the diplomatic corps and forever describe this as a young country, in one respect you are right. In another respect you are profoundly wrong because we are older than most of you.
It is for us an enormous privilege to share this continent with our Indigenous brothers and sisters because, as I have travelled around Australia this week, celebrating Australia in each of our state and territory capitals, I have been reminded afresh of the great linkages we have with antiquity through the dance, celebration, and the art, of the first Australians. If those of you among us have had the privilege of seeing the great caves at Lascaux in France and Altamira in Spain, and other great ancient civilizational and cultural sites across the world, here with have with our Indigenous brothers and sisters this living link and this continuing cultural link to the deepest of deep antiquity, and as Prime Minister of Australia, as Prime Minister of all Australians, it gives me enormous pride and enormous pleasure in being able to reflect the achievements of this deep and ancient culture to the peoples of the world.
Secondly, you are here as our guests this evening. So long as the people endure us, Therese and I live here at The Lodge in Canberra. This is the home of the Australian Prime Minister and has been so since the 1920s, with the odd interruption. That wasn't a partisan remark. Let me inform you of a point of history. When the Depression broke out in 1929, this Lodge having opened in 1927, one of my Labor predecessors, Jim Scullin, declined to live in The Lodge. He did so for ideological and political reasons in the ravages of the Depression and lost the subsequent election, so when I say it has been occupied almost consistently since then, my reflection was more on times past than times recent.
Those who share this house with us, we have our son Marcus, who attends local school, we also have our dog and our cat, Abby and Jasper, and for those of you who haven't followed this at all, and because it is my bounded duty to act as the publisher's publicist, today we release this contribution to world literature. It is called Jasper and Abby and the Great Australia Day Kerfuffle. There will be a simultaneous interpretation of the meaning of kerfuffle by our interpreter service out there later on. Basically, it means a shemozzle. You don't know what a shemozzle is either, do you? Basically - chaos, and to our representatives here from the Nobel committee, our representatives from Oslo and Stockholm if I can make an early suggestion that this be considered for the Nobel Prize for literature.
The plot is succinct, it's sharp, it only goes for 26 pages the characters are very interesting because they are not human although, I'm in it. Don't laugh. The good guys, the dog and the cat, prevail at the end of the day. They rescue the Australia Day celebrations from complete calamity but I don't want to wreck the story for you. There are 600 people here this evening. Go out and buy a copy, because all the proceeds go to the Centre for Community Child Health at the Royal Children's Hospital in Melbourne. And if you buy a copy, not that I wish to labour this point at all, Jasper and Abbey have agreed to assemble for autographed paw prints at the entrance to the Lodge at a later occasion. And to our representatives here from the RSPCA, come to see me later and I'd love to sign this over to you with Therese as a copy in honour of the work that you do with the animals here in Canberra.
That was the serious part of my speech.
Friends, thank you for joining us to celebrate our national day. We in Australia love a party and we don't look for many excuses to celebrate, but this is a particular and legitimate national excuse for a celebration.
When you think of Australia it is the most unlikely of countries in many respects. Here we occupy this vast continent we have, I think, the third largest coastline in the world. Our maritime zone, I think, is the third largest in the world. We, in addition to our indigenous brothers and sisters, arrived here as an unlikely band of criminals 222 years ago, and to the British High Commissioner who would then mutter under his breath that nothing has changed since - could I say that it has been a remarkably, successful, political experiment.
Because in this country Australia, in the centuries and the decades since then we have welcomed people from all countries from across the world. We have become a completely multicultural society. We have representatives from every culture and country in creation. It has been an enormous enrichment to our Australian life, our way of being, the food that we eat, the dance that we celebrate, the music that we hear, that all these countries and cultures have contributed to the shape and the texture of modern Australia.
We are among the oldest continuing democracies in the world and we hold our freedom dearly. It is a freedom that we have defended and continue to defend into the future. But in that freedom, we defend also the right to diversity but also we cherish our unity as a nation.
In the week just past I've been speaking a lot around Australia about the spirit that is Australia. If I was to summarise it in a couple of short phrases it would be along these lines. In Australia we see ourselves as animated by a spirit of the 'can do'. That is, to make things happen. We are a practical people. We want to see things change from what is good to something that is better, from something bad into something good. When we are confronted with a practical challenge our first instinct is not to simply complain about it. Our first instinct is, well what can we do about to improve it, to change it for the better.
We see ourselves as animated by this spirit of the 'can do' because we have had to craft a country for a continent, a continent for a county and we have done so with our bare hands.
Yet there is another spirit which animates Australians and it is this, it is the spirit of the fair go. The spirit of compassion, the spirit of reaching out to those who need a helping hand, whether they are our friends, whether they are our neighbours or whether they are people we have never met. Whether it is the good people of Sumatra who were devastated by Tsunami five years ago, or the good people of Haiti who have been devastated by an earthquake most recently. Our first instinct, as Australians, both home and abroad has been how can we help our friends and our neighbours in need.
We have, about us, a national culture and a spirit that is this nation which holds these truths to be one, that we can celebrate individual achievement, enterprise, success, and the triumph of the human spirit and human imagination on the one hand, and have that as comfortable partner with a spirit of compassion and care when looking after our fellow human beings.
So, in a sentence or two, that is the spirit of Australia.
What we have here today, gathered among us, the representatives of so many community and church and charitable organisations from the city of Canberra, are the living embodiment of that spirit of work here in our local community, and to the members of the diplomatic corps, your local community. Those who make difference to those who need a helping hand in our community; the church and charitable sector to assist those families who have difficulty paying the rent next week or put food on the table; the sporting organisations who make it possible for our phenomenal national achievements in community sporting participation to roll on week after week, year after year, involving families and kids in team sports and all of that means for a child's development.
So to each of you who are community leaders and representatives here, from our city of Canberra, our nation's capital, as Prime Minister of the country, as a resident of this city, can I say, thank you for the work that you do, you embody, here in our community, the spirit of Australia.
To our from friends abroad, can I also make some remarks. I've described Australia's spirit as a 'can do' spirit and the spirit of a fair go. That is, the spirit of enterprise, the spirit of achievement but the spirit, also, of compassionate engagement and deep engagement with the affairs of the region and the world.
For us, these values which make up Australia do not stop there at the continental shelf. We seek to reflect them with our engagement with the world. We will do so imperfectly. Occasionally we will irritate some of them. We do not do so intentionally. As Australians' our aspiration is this: to be the friend of all and the enemy of none and we would hope to be able to work in the closest cooperation with our friends and partners across the region and the world.
To the governments that you represent, here in our country Australia, could I extend, through you as their diplomatic representatives, my best and personal greetings on this our national day. We value our relationships with our oldest and continuing friends, partners and allies as we value our relationships and friendships and partnerships with our newest friends and partners and neighbours as well, because in this globalised world we are all on this planet, Mother Earth, together. As a consequence we share challenges and responsibilities for maintaining the good order and good governance of planet earth and the human family more broadly.
The challenges we face as an international community are vast. They are continuing and some are new - the challenges of the Millennium Development Goals and the elimination of poverty. They do not often fill the pages of the newspapers but for the 2 million of our fellow human beings who this evening are below $2 a day, for them this is a very real and daily and grinding experience. There is nothing ennobling about poverty at home or abroad.
So, our challenges, to deal with the global and continuing scourge of poverty; to deal also with the great and continuing challenge of nuclear disarmament in delivering a safer world community for us all; and the great planetary challenge we face of climate change. These are challenges enough for our community, our global community, to work together to make a difference. These are where our efforts, as representatives of countries of goodwill should focus themselves in the year and the decade ahead.
I conclude with this - as we embark upon this New Year and as we embark upon this new and second decade of the 21st century, let us as always, as all governments and all countries, have about us a very simple approach: a very simple sense of the possible; a very simple approach to alternative possibilities.
We are all human beings. We come from different cultural traditions, we come from many different religious traditions. Our experiences are vastly different. But we are united by the common bonds of the human family.
It is our choice, as human beings, whether we make a difference on climate change or not. It is our choice, as human beings, whether we make a difference and choose peace or war. It is our choice as human beings that we make a difference to those who suffer poverty this very day in so many counties and continents around the world.
Sometimes, when we are in the business of politics, including international politics, we conclude that it is the responsibility of some mysterious force out there to make a difference. I think on occasions like this it's important to remind us all that we are human beings - we elect our leaders and some of us are leaders and we therefore have a common responsibility to the human family.
How we think about these things affects, fundamentally, how we act on these things. If we think of peace; if we think of preserving our planet; if we think of an age in the future when we do not have nuclear weapons; and how we can make the necessary steps to achieve those goals - you know something? It brings those goals just one bit closer than they would have otherwise be.
Thank you, my friends, for spending time with Therese and I at our residence here in Canberra, the Lodge. You are welcome guests among us as representatives of this local community, as representatives of the diplomatic community. I wish you all a very, very happy Australia Day and I look forward to working with you all in meeting the great challenges of 2010.
This is the fun bit. I get to have a drink now and you've been here for an hour having a drink. I have a very simple and formal responsibility as the Prime Minister of the Commonwealth of Australia and it is at this stage to propose a very simple toast, in one word, to Australia.
Australia.
I thank you.


The Prime Minister's XI is a proud tradition. It was established by one of my predecessors, Robert Gordon Menzies, known affectionately as Ming to many politicians at the time. From the other side of politics to myself, can I say one this which unites all in the political sphere of our nation is a love and passion for cricket, so I honour Menzies for having invented this tradition, and his successors for having sustained it, and one of my predecessors, RJ Hawke, for having revitalised it not so many years ago.
Those of you who are familiar with Parliament House, Canberra - I understand that the PM's XI have been around the building today, is that right, Matt, talking to various people? - you'll see that great, green patch of turf across the top of the building is in fact an elongated wicket. We use it for those purposes. The Prime Minister's courtyard is made of concrete. We also use it for our own practice nets. I think, Matt, you've been out there with me on a previous occasion, and in fact was very gentle when he was batting and I was bowling, because he thought I needed to be treated with appropriate respect - and he just took me for six anyway.
Can I say also that none of us in the political process can claim any prominence in the game at all. All of us are, in fact, lousy, led by myself, but that doesn't diminish our passion for the game and our interest in it.
Chris, your team has proven all the pundits wrong. After a difficult start at the 'Gabba Test, can I just say the subsequent matches in Adelaide and Perth, that absolute nail biter in Perth was absolutely spectacular cricket to watch, and those of us who had the privilege to watch it, in our case on the television, and his stupendous six at the WACA, frankly, you are Captain Entertainment when it comes to cricket and it's great to have you among us.
Here at The Lodge, as I said, this tradition was begun by my predecessor Menzies quite a long time ago. Back in 1963, he had a team here, and as was the convention of the time, he had brought the team to The Lodge on the night before for a cocktail reception. He then decided to give all members of the Prime Minister's XI a solid talking to because many of them, the previous year's game, had got completely smashed at the reception. He then remonstrated and said there'd been poor form and bad behaviour.
However, an eyewitness to the occasion, Don Chipp, then in the Liberal Party, later the founder of the Democrats, recently gone on to meet his maker, however provided an eyewitness account because Chipp, on that occasion, was at the non-striker's end at what was to be the last appearance of the mighty Don himself at a Prime Minister's XI game.
The Don, I was told by someone who played in the game who is here today, got out on the second ball. Don Chipp was at the other end. Chipp in fact relayed this anecdote to everyone about what happened with Menzies' speech, and then said Menzies, having made everyone feel thoroughly ashamed of themselves for their behaviour last year, then began to mix one of what was called Menzies' favourite cocktails, a Menzies Martini, which could basically kickstart a jumbo jet on a bad day, and then, as a consequence of that, they all became entirely merry and out of control for the next day's game as well.
So, those of you from the - I'm fine, mate - those of you from the West Indies, when you are handed a drink this evening, be very relaxed and comfortable about the fact that in fact it is full of Kevin's Tequila Sunrises. It's basically just to put you in a right frame of mind for the game tomorrow.
In the Prime Minister's XI we have no less than eight players who are 25 years or younger, and I note that among those young players we've also got Mitch Marsh. Mitch is fresh back from the Under 19 World Cup, where he captained Australia to victory over the weekend against Pakistan, so well done Mitch.
I see tomorrow we also have Tasmanian George Bailey, who's back again playing on my side. George was the star of the show last year and he was man of the match. He tore the travelling New Zealanders apart with a match-winning 107 not out in 42 degrees heat at the Manuka Oval. So can I just say to you, young George, we expect better of you tomorrow - no pressure. Where are you, mate? He's disappeared! He's over there. No pressure mate. It's okay, just relax, but the benchmark is 107 and we expect some improvement.
I also welcome to The Lodge that mountain of a man who really needs no introduction, of course - our captain, Matt Hayden. Here we have a true legend of the modern game, an absolute legend, full of grit and pride and someone who has proudly worn the baggy green for a long, long time with his own partner in crime, Justin Langer. Justin Langer led the side to victory last year, and Matt - not to place any pressure on you as well - I expect a better performance than last year.
Matt's record both in the long and the short form of the game is as intimidating as the shadow he left on the wicket for bowlers fast and slow for over 15 years representing Australia. He has scored over 8,600 runs in 103 Tests with no less than 30 times making a century, and with an overall average of 50, the mark of absolute greatness, please honour the captain of the Prime Minister's XI, Matt Hayden.
We also attended briefly the same school in Brisbane, myself a little earlier than Matt. I had two years at Marist Brothers Ashgrove and the cricket coach of the team encouraged me to take on the game professionally and go international, but I declined and they made room for Matt instead.
Matt, actually, when you deal with any of the old boys of the school is actually known as an old boy of the school. I'm that other bloke on television.
And now to our tourists. I welcome you, also, to The Lodge. I mentioned to you, Big Bird Joel Garner, joining you tonight as your team manager. Joel, where are you? How could you be missed? I was convinced when we had the photographs before that he was in fact standing on the step behind me. In fact, he was standing down a step, and Joel, you are so much admired in this country. We love your work, we love your form, and you've provided such enormous entertainment to Australian cricket fans over such a long period of time. Welcome to The Lodge.
[Applause]
Chris Gayle, I've made some mention of already. This man is cool personified, and they call me a nerd, mate, so perhaps you and I could just exchange some notes later on, and you could nerd up and I could cool up. Some would regard that as a hopeless proposition. The latter, not the former, mate. His strokeplay is just absolutely extraordinary and it's a joy to watch. I mentioned before his six at the WACA, but can I just say also his 100 runs in 70 deliveries in Perth, and as we understand, the third fastest in Test history - a stunning innings. Congratulations on your extraordinary achievements.
[Applause]
Now, to conclude, can I simply say this - my record as Prime Minister so far in the Prime Minister's XI is one loss and one win. Tomorrow, not wishing to put pressure on anybody gathered in the room, could I simply say I wish to see the PM's XI improve somewhat on the averages, and again, Matt, no pressure.
Seriously, this is a great occasion, it's a great celebration of cricket. To our friends from ACT Cricket and local players younger and older - I saw some young blokes out there before, 12, 13, 14 years old, you too can play like Joel Garner, but we'll be checking your height records later on. Can I say to those who are already active in the local competition here in the ACT, good on you. You represent a great cricketing tradition here in our wider region.
To those from the corporate community who back this occasion, can I thank you for your participation as well.
Cricket's a great celebration of Australia. It's a great celebration of Australian sport. It's a great celebration of international sport. You know, whenever I travel, whether it's in India - I think I see the High Commissioner for India, who I failed to acknowledge before, lovely to have you, High Commissioner - whether it's in Pakistan, whether it's in the Windies, whether it's in the UK, whether it's in New Zealand, or whether it is in South Africa or elsewhere, the unity which comes from this game and our passion for it, I think, speaks for itself.
So here's to a celebration of cricket, here's to a celebration in anticipation of champagne cricket tomorrow, and may the best team win.
I thank you.
[ends]


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as one of the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
Mr Speaker, two years ago I made a formal Apology in this Parliament to the Indigenous peoples of Australia, and particularly to the Stolen Generations, on behalf of the Government, the Parliament and the people of Australia.
On that day in 2008, I also pledged to lead a new, national effort to close the gap in life expectancy and life opportunities between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.
On that day, we achieved for the first time a bi-partisan commitment to closing the gap:
     * together, we acknowledged the failure of successive governments to deliver to many Indigenous communities;
     * together, we demonstrated that closing the gap is a national priority that should be above partisan politics, and
     * together, we recognised that closing the gap would take not a parliamentary term, but a generation.
When we came to Government the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous life expectancy at birth was estimated at 17 years.
Indigenous children in Western Australia, South Australia and the Northern Territory were 3.6 times more likely to die before they reached the age of five than non-Indigenous children.
Almost one in 10 dwellings in remote and very remote Indigenous communities were in need of major repair or replacement.
In 2006, only 47.4 per cent of Indigenous young people had attained Year 12 or equivalent.
And the employment gap between Indigenous and non Indigenous Australians aged 15 to 64 stood at around 21 percentage points in 2008.
In other areas, such as literacy and numeracy, comparable national data did not exist, though a large gap in achievement between Indigenous and non-Indigenous students was evident.
These failures presents us with a substantial challenge.
But in facing this challenge, I believe there has never before been the commitment to change that there is today.
We have seen a growing movement to take responsibility for change - among both Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.
If we are to make a break from the failures of the past, we must all play our part.
     * Governments, first, must take responsibility for addressing their past failures in Indigenous affairs.
     * Second, Indigenous Australians must take greater responsibility for change - change begins in the lives of individuals and families, spreading across local communities.
     * Third, Australians across all walks of life must take responsibility for re-setting relations between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.
Mr Speaker, today I table my second annual statement on closing the gap. 
Since the Parliament made the Apology two years ago, the Australian Government has reached, for the first time, a national agreement with State and Territory governments on closing the gap - for the first time, rather than pulling in different directions, pulling together; for the first time, a national investment of $4.6 billion; and for the first time, setting common goals to transform the health, education and employment outcomes of Indigenous Australians.
For the first time, Governments agreed to six clear targets, which work together to close the gap in life expectancy between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians within a generation.
We set these targets knowing they were ambitious. We know meeting them won't be easy.
Generations of Indigenous disadvantage cannot be turned around overnight.
We know it will need unprecedented effort by all parts of the Australian community.
But there is no greater social challenge facing Australia than closing this yawning gap.
And today I can report to the House that on the ground, we are seeing the beginnings of change.
The report I table today outlines a slow path to change.
It demonstrates the challenges of accurate data - to track our progress to closing the gap - and thereby meet our targets.
But, it also demonstrates that while progress is slow, there is action in communities right across Australia - action by governments; action by Indigenous communities; and action by the wider Australian community.
Mr Speaker, I will now address each of the six targets we set in 2008.
The Government's first target is to halve the mortality gap between Indigenous children and other children under five years of age by 2018.
In 2008, the gap in child mortality meant that 205 out of any 100,000 Indigenous children died before the age of 5, compared to 100 non-Indigenous children - a difference of more than 100.
Indigenous children are twice as likely to die before the age of five than non-Indigenous kids.
This is a shameful statistic. For all parents, it is shocking and confronting.
While 2009 data to measure progress against this target is not yet available, other data sources can provide some measure of change.
We know that the gap in infant mortality rates in New South Wales, Queensland, South Australia, Western Australia and the Northern Territory has been on the decline over the past decade.
This decline has been particularly evident over recent years and now stands at 5.3 percentage points.
We must continue to act to see this decline accelerated and our target reached by 2018.
Towards that goal, we have already rolled out 40 new services for mothers and babies.
Under the $90.3 million Mothers and Babies Services program, a total of 11,000 mothers and babies will be supported over five years with services including improved antenatal and postnatal care, advice on nutrition and health checks.
And today I can announce that nine new services will be funded, including at:
     * the Laynhapuy Homelands Association and the Pintubi Homelands Health Service in the Northern Territory;
     * at the Tullawon Health Service in South Australia, at the Tasmanian Aboriginal Centre;
     * at the Wirraka Maya Health Service in Western Australia; and
     * at Mookai Rosie Bi-Bayan in Queensland.
In addition to these services,
     * The Australian Government is supporting pregnant women to improve their own health through establishing five sites under the $37.4 million Australian Nurse Family Partnership Program.
     * We have provided a total of 390 ear, nose and throat specialist services and a total of 1,990 dental services to 1,429 children who live in the Northern Territory Emergency Response communities in the six months from July to December last year alone.
     * And the Red Cross is working with Outback Stores to bring more fresh fruit to Indigenous kids in the Territory through breakfast clubs in 33 communities and 13 homeland centres.
Our second target is to provide access to early childhood education for all four-year olds in remote Indigenous communities within five years.
Getting the best start in life begins early.
Early childhood education is essential to getting the right start in learning and preparing for school.
But the best available data shows only around 60 per cent of Indigenous children are enrolled in an early childhood education program in the year before school, compared to around 70 per cent of all children.
The good news is that the trend is in the right direction - more Indigenous children are being enrolled.
And we are seeing the fastest pre-school enrolment growth in remote communities, increasing by 31 per cent between 2005 and 2008.
We are expanding early learning opportunities for Indigenous children through the establishment of 36 Children and Family Centres bringing together important services including child care, early learning and parent and family support programs.
21 of these 36 centres will be located in regional and remote areas, including in Kununurra in Western Australia; Mornington Island in Queensland; and Walgett in New South Wales.
Another will be located in Yuendumu in the Northern Territory, where the Yuendumu Early Childhood Centre is already held up as a model of successful early childhood education.
Every day between 40 and 60 children, along with their parents and extended family, go along to the centre to paint, read books, ride bikes and play. The children have breakfast and lunch there, the community nurse visits and they go on excursions to the pool and into the bush. The 14 local Aboriginal child care workers who look after them say the children are healthy and happy.
With more children benefitting from early childhood education, the flow-on effect will help us meet our third and fourth targets: to halve the gap in literacy and numeracy achievement between Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander students and other students within a decade and to halve the gap between Indigenous and non-indigenous students in rates of Year 12 attainment or an equivalent attainment by 2020.
These two targets are critical to closing the gap, because it is education, above all, that will improve the life chances and unlock the potential of Indigenous Australians.
The evidence is unambiguous.
Finishing Year 12 transforms students' future opportunities.
It builds pathways to more secure, better paid and more fulfilling jobs.
And the learning basics - literacy and numeracy - are fundamental to all Australian children.
And they are critical to healthier, happier and longer lives.
The evidence shows the gap in meeting literacy and numeracy standards between Indigenous and non-Indigenous students is large.
These gaps are evident from as early as year 3 - with the largest gap in 2008 being 29.4 percentage points for Year 5 reading.
Literacy and numeracy scores vary across grades; in 2009 there was an improvement in the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous students' reading for Years 3, 5 and 7. For Year 9 students, the gap slightly increased.
The Government is taking action to expand opportunities for Indigenous children at school.
Around 78,000 Indigenous students - almost half of all Indigenous primary and secondary school students - will benefit from the Government's $1.5 billion investment in 1500 low socio-economic schools, as well as substantial investments in literacy and numeracy.
And we are seeing great results from the Stronger Smarter Leadership Program of Dr Chris Sarra whose "clear expectations, high expectations'' philosophy for educating Indigenous children is delivering remarkable results among the 44 schools signed up to it.
The Government provided Stronger Smarter Learning Communities in September 2009 to support an initial 12 'hub' schools in New South Wales, Queensland and Western Australia.
We expect this to grow to 60 hub schools over the next four years, supporting between 180 and 240 affiliated schools.
One school that has already signed up is East Kalgoorlie Primary School in Western Australia.
Faced with what she described as significant challenges, Principal Donna Bridge used her experience of the Stronger Smarter Leadership Program to enlist the support of parents and the community to bring about change.
Five years later, attitudes have changed, school attendance is up and there have been significant improvements in literacy and numeracy.
In Cape York in far North Queensland, school attendance is also up, driven by the Cape York Welfare Reforms - created by Indigenous leader Noel Pearson and supported by the Commonwealth and state governments.
Under the reforms welfare payments are linked to parents taking responsibility to care for their kids and make sure they go to school.
In Aurukun, one community in the trial, school attendance rose from 44 to 66 per cent last year while in Coen it was 93 per cent - two points higher than the state average.
In 2006, only 47.4 per cent of Indigenous 20- to 24-year-olds had attained a Year 12 or equivalent qualification, almost half as many as non-Indigenous young people.
Indigenous school retention rates from the start of high school to Year 12 have risen from 30.7 per cent in 1995 to 46.5 per cent in 2008, a 6.4 percentage point increase.
With concerted government effort and the contribution of organisations like the Clontarf Academy we are working to close the gap.
Clontarf's school-based sport academies are tackling poor attendance and outcomes among Indigenous students through sport and recreation - with some great results, including school attendance rates of more than 80 per cent and improved academic performance.
By the end of February, 2,300 students in 36 schools across three states will be signed up.
Clontarf is one of the academies funded through the Australian Government's Sporting Chance Program, to support Indigenous students' engagement with school.
Overall, the programs have achieved an average attendance rate of 79 per cent - six percentage points above the average rate for all Indigenous students in the schools -so I'm pleased to announce today that in 2010 an additional 17 sports academies will commence across Western Australia, the Northern Territory and Victoria.
This will support about 1,000 students, and will bring the total number of students in the program to some 10,000.
10 of these new academies will be for girls.
The new academies will be established in Broome, Fitzroy Crossing, Bunbury and North Albany, in Western Australia; West Arnhem, Palmerston, Katherine and Alice Springs in the Northern Territory; Mooroopna, Bendigo and Ballarat in Victoria; and Townsville in Queensland.
As well, the Clontarf Foundation will operate seven new football academies in Jabiru and Gunbalanya in the Northern Territory; and in Bairnsdale, Warrnambool, Swan Hill, Robinvale and Mildura in Victoria.
Our fifth target is to halve within a decade the gap in employment outcomes between Indigenous and other Australians.
On this goal, there is a positive trend.
Between 2002 and 2008, the Indigenous employment rate rose from 48 per cent to 53.8 per cent.
This is still well below the non-Indigenous employment rate so that in 2008, the most recent available data indicates there was a 21 percentage point gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous employment.
Over the past year, we have replaced Community Development Employment Project jobs with more than 1,500 jobs delivering government services to Indigenous communities.
These, for the first time, are now sustainable, proper jobs.
The best way to accelerate growth in indigenous employment is to give people the skills to get and keep a job.
Seven schools in the 29 remote communities targeted under the National Partnership on Remote Service Delivery already have Trades Training Centres under our $2.5 billion national investment in Trade Training Centres to give school students early opportunities to develop skills for a profession in the trades, and to help them complete Year 12 or an equivalent qualification.
But others can still benefit.
In communities like Hermannsburg, dedicated teachers have lifted school attendance to better than 90 per cent in junior school.
To be successful, these young people need to be actively engaged beyond their primary school years.
The Government is acting today to improve access to first rate education facilities for students in school remote Indigenous communities.
I announce today that intensive support and assistance will be given to schools that from the 29 Remote Service Delivery priority locations that have not already had funding from the Trades Training Centres program.
Schools in remote communities with large Indigenous student populations will also be provided with extra flexibility to deliver training targeted at the needs and education levels in these communities, including pre-vocational and Certificate I and II qualifications.
We're also working with the private sector to create real business and employment opportunities.
The Government is also investing $3 million to support the new Australian Indigenous Minority Supplier Council, which helps certified Indigenous businesses to win new contracts in the private and government sectors.
After only five months, the Council has signed up 31 major corporations as backers.
Already, it has helped secure $3.3 million worth of contracts for 15 Indigenous businesses.
To encourage businesses across Australia to take action to close the gap on Indigenous disadvantage, we have appointed a Government Ambassador for Business Action.
This position has been filled by Colin Carter, a highly regarded Australian businessman who was a founding partner of Boston Consulting Group in Australia, and who has more recently served as the director of the Cape York Institute for Indigenous Policy and Leadership.
Mr Carter will work with Australian businesses to promote the employment of Indigenous people, and to encourage business people to share their skills with Indigenous communities to help set up and grow their own businesses.
These efforts will are in addition to the work of the Australian Employment Covenant, through which some 16,000 Indigenous jobs have been committed over the coming years from Australian business.
All these efforts culminate in our sixth and final target - to close the life expectancy gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians within a generation.
As of today we are informed that the life expectancy gap is 11.5 years for men and 9.7 for women.
An Indigenous male born today is likely to die at just 67 years of age, and an Indigenous female at 73 years.
This is less than the 17-year gap that we thought existed a year ago.
This is good news - but it is the result of having more reliable data, rather than the result of any real improvement on the ground.
In the past, we haven't had reliable information on Indigenous life expectancy.
So we haven't reliably known the size of the gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.
There's evidence to suggest that some progress may have been made.
But the progress is clearly too slow.
Closing the life expectancy gap is a cumulative target, relying on our success in meeting each of the other targets for achievement.
Obviously, the health of Indigenous people is a major factor.
Tobacco, obesity and physical inactivity are the leading risk factors, accounting for around 45 per cent of the total health gap.
Since 2007-2008, Indigenous specific health spending has increased by 57 per cent.
This includes nearly $1.6 billion over four years to fight the treatable chronic diseases that account for two-thirds of premature Indigenous deaths.
And it includes the $14.5 million Indigenous Tobacco Control Initiative, a package of 20 innovative anti-smoking projects in urban, regional and remote Indigenous communities.
I spoke early about the legacy of decades of government failure still endured by Indigenous Australians.
This makes it all the more urgent to be vigilant about what is working and what is not.
That is why, when evidence emerged of unacceptable delays in our major Indigenous housing program in the Northern Territory last year, the Government took unprecedented action to get the program on track.
That action has delivered results.
As a result, we remain on target to build 750 new houses, and rebuild or refurbish another 2500 in remote Indigenous communities by 2013 - through the Australian Government working together with the government of the Northern Territory.
It is in that spirit, we have instructed the COAG Reform Council to produce an annual assessment of the performance of governments against the closing the gap targets.
We have also appointed a Co-ordinator General for Remote Indigenous Services, to oversee the roll-out of local plans in 29 remote communities and to cut through the red tape that slows delivery on the ground.
In the Coordinator General's first six-monthly report, released in December last year, he identified that 'business-as-usual' approaches are still too widespread.
He noted that fragmentation and siloing may act as a barrier to achieve improvements in service delivery necessary to close the gap.
And to that end, I can announce today a new Flexible Funding Pool to free up funds for remote service delivery and ensure that red tape doesn't get in the way of progress in these communities.
This funding pool will target high priority projects in the 29 Indigenous communities that are the initial priority of the National Partnership Agreement.
The $46 million for this funding pool over the next three years will allow the Government to respond flexibly and quickly to Indigenous community needs and act on Local Implementation Plans.
We are not just making unprecedented investments in Indigenous communities, we are doing things differently.
For example, central to our $5.5 billion investment in remote Indigenous housing is our target of 20 per cent Indigenous employment.
In the Northern Territory, Indigenous employment is currently running at 35 per cent, providing jobs for more than 100 Aboriginal people across the Territory.
One of them is 24 year-old Tiwi Islander Harry Munkara who's building houses in the community of Nguiu.
Harry's a carpenter and, with overtime, he's earning around $800 a week.
Harry told The Australian this week that for the first time he was managing to save money to put aside for his toddler son. And, Harry says, he wants to be a role model for his people.
Mr Speaker, after some early difficulties in the housing construction program, houses are now being built.
Over 50 new houses are now under construction in the Territory, with the keys to the first two houses handed over to tenants this week.
Refurbishments are being made to around 80 homes that were in poor repair.
And more than 70 have already been completed and handed back to the Northern Territory Government, for allocation to Indigenous families.
In total across Australia, under the Remote Indigenous Housing National Partnership, over 150 new houses are now under construction across the country.
15 of these have been completed.
Over 230 refurbishments are also underway and 120 of these have been completed.
To ensure that our investments in remote communities bear fruit on the ground, we are seeking a fundamental change in the way housing is delivered.
We are insisting that the states and the Northern Territory obtain secure tenure for housing so that the government has security over the land.
In the past, the communal nature of Aboriginal land made it unclear who was responsible for maintaining houses and other structures built on the land.
But we have matched an unprecedented investment with tenancy reform to ensure the residents pay rent and care for their homes.
Indigenous people in public housing, like other public housing tenants, will have standard tenancy arrangements in place and the state government will be responsible for maintaining the houses.
We are acquiring security over land so that housing and essential services can be built for the long term, so private companies can feel comfortable about investing, and so that home ownership can become possible.
Many Indigenous communities - including 14 in the Northern Territory - have shown a willingness to sign the new leases and obtain significant new investments.
With secure tenure obtained over all 18 Alice Springs town camps, we have put our $150 million Alice Springs Transformation Plan into action.
We are cleaning up the camps, controlling the number of dogs, introducing new alcohol counselling services, and this month we start building new houses.
The 60 to 100 residents of one town camp - Ilpeye Ilpeye - have made clear their aspirations to own their own homes, so the Australian Government has changed the tenure of this land from community lease to freehold title.
This means the land can be subdivided into individual housing blocks.
Over time, that means members of this community can own their own homes.
Communities with strong social norms that give families the incentives to take responsibility for their lives and build a better future.
No family can function in overcrowded, derelict houses in which stoves and taps don't work, children can't get a good night's sleep and adults can't be rested and ready for work.
Many Indigenous Australians aspire to home ownership, as other Australians do.
To illustrate that, I note the remarks of Alice Springs traditional owner Darryl Pearce reported in the media last month.
Mr Pearce said his people wanted the same rights to land ownership and economic development opportunities as other Australians. In his words:
"We want respect - and that's what the government has given us."
Mr Speaker, the Australian Government wants to help Indigenous people build healthy families and thriving communities.
That is why we have invested $1.2 billion in the Northern Territory Emergency Response measures since we were elected because we are there for the long haul.
Since coming to government, the number of people supported by income management has increased from around 1,400 to over 16,000.
We have now moved to put the Northern Territory Emergency Response on a long-term, sustainable footing.
We have introduced legislation to reinstate the Racial Discrimination Act - which the previous government had suspended in order to ensure the Emergency Response was immune from legal challenge.
And we have taken the decision to apply income management to all welfare recipients in specified categories across the Territory from July.
The number of people on income management in the NT is estimated to rise to around 20,000.
This is the first step in an extension of the scheme - once it has been carefully evaluated - to disadvantaged locations across Australia.
The Government's welfare reforms seek to help all disadvantaged Australians - not just those who are Indigenous - to take on more individual responsibility and move beyond welfare dependence.
In delivering these reforms, we are acting in the interests of the most vulnerable people - the elderly, women and children.
Governments are responsible for helping communities to develop the structures and leaders they need to restore social norms, recognising that change takes time.
However, individuals also have responsibilities: to provide safe and secure homes for their children; to go to school or to make sure their children go to school; to pay rent, look for work, avoid self-destructive behaviour, and give the people in their care every opportunity to thrive.
These are the foundations on which strong communities are built, and on which people can make the most of their natural abilities.
Mr Speaker, today I am asking Indigenous leaders - in families, in communities and across the nation - to step up and take responsibility for restoring strong social norms in their own communities.
Many are doing this now.
Just look at the Kimberley town of Fitzroy Crossing, where women such as June Oscar and Emily Carter led a community campaign for alcohol restrictions.
Two years after they won their battle, the incidence of domestic violence and alcohol-related injuries is down, baby birth weights are up, and police say the town is a much calmer place.
Now the community is working with police, business and three tiers of government on a plan to improve services and close the gap in Fitzroy Crossing.
In the nearby town of Halls Creek, the community's successful push for alcohol restrictions last year has brought a sharp drop in the incidence of arrests and domestic violence.
In Queensland, at Mornington Island and Aurukun - as alcohol restrictions have come in, violent crime has gone down.
There are many other Indigenous people around Australia who don't make the headlines but are quietly making a difference - and making fundamental changes in their own communities.
Mr Speaker, all Australians can play a part in building this better future and Australians from all across the nation are taking action.
Across the country, banks, football clubs, mining companies, local councils, hospitals, schools and even the Perth Zoo are hiring Indigenous workers, contracting with Indigenous businesses supporting Indigenous communities.
10 years ago Rio Tinto had 130 Indigenous employees; today it has 1400.
BHP Billiton has 10 contracts with Indigenous businesses worth $350 million through one of its subsidiaries, WA Iron Ore.
It employs 255 Aboriginal workers directly and another 465 indirectly through its contractors. 
The ANZ Bank had taken on 420 Indigenous employees by the end of last year, and is committed to filling 10 per cent of entry level positions with Aboriginal people by 2011.
Since 2006, 165 organisations have completed Reconciliation Action Plans through Reconciliation Australia, with 168 more to be launched this year.
By the end of this year 15 per cent of the Australian workforce - including employees at Australia's 11 largest companies - will work for an organisation that has a Reconciliation Action Plan.
Through these practical efforts to promote reconciliation, organisations have created 6,500 positions for Indigenous people, and filled 3,000 of them.
They have awarded $750 million in contracts to Indigenous businesses.
Sometimes they do it because it brings business benefits and because it creates a sustainable investment for the companies and the Indigenous employees they hire, but these organisations are also taking action because they share a vision of a fairer Australia.
Australians want to close the gap.
91 per cent of non-Indigenous Australians and 100 per cent of Indigenous Australians surveyed by Reconciliation Australia said that the relationship between the two peoples was important to this country.
10 years ago this May, 250,000 Australians walked across Sydney Harbour Bridge - and 750,000 people walked around the country - in support of reconciliation.
10 years on, there remains a long journey ahead of us to lift Indigenous outcomes in health, housing, schools and jobs, but as a government and as a people, we can now see a path ahead and we are determined to move forward.
Not like the past, where it was non-Indigenous Australians seeking to lead Indigenous Australians, but instead, walking together, First Australians alongside all Australians, towards a stronger and fairer Australian nation.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY 
When I was your age, learning about science, I sometimes found it confusing - like learning about the law of gravity. I mean, it's really important, because if we didn't have gravity, when birds died, they'd just stay right up there; and if time didn't move forward, you could get stuck in the classroom at school forever and the holidays would never come; and if it wasn't for nuclear science, Homer Simpson would never have found a job.
You know, I might not have been the best science student in school, but I did learn one very valuable lesson after a year 8 chemistry experiment that I still remember to this day - never, ever lick the spoon!
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
And I'd like to say a big hello to the children who are here today, from:
     * St Bede's Primary School; and
     * Campbell Primary School.
And joining us through the wonders of science by video conference:
     * Windsor Public School
     * Biraban Public School
     * Gresford Public School
     * Peak Hill Central School;
     * Thornton Public School;
     * Shellharbour Public School;
     * Broken Hill School of the Air; and
     * Crawford Public School.
This is a very exciting day indeed - not only do we get to honour a very special guest but some of us got to hold some gigantic shoelaces. If the size of that shoelace is any indication, imagine how big those shoes must be!
Today we are here for a very important reason - to congratulate Professor Elizabeth Blackburn, who has been awarded the most prestigious science award in the world - the Nobel Prize for Medicine.
Professor Blackburn is the 11th Australian Nobel Prize winner and the first Australian woman to receive the award. I know I speak on behalf of all Australians, Professor Blackburn, when I say that we are very proud of you.
I think everyone should put their hands together and give Professor Blackburn a big round of applause.
We have just learnt a bit about Professor Blackburn's discoveries about telomeres. Telomeres might be small - and hard to pronounce - but they are very important for how our bodies work, and in the future, they are going to be very important as scientists like Professor Blackburn look for a cure for cancer.
Of course, Professor Blackburn has also won other awards for her work. On Australia Day this year, she was appointed a Companion of the Order of Australia, and back in 1998 she won what is now known as the Prime Minister's Prize for Science.
Coincidentally, nominations for the 2010 Prime Minister's Prize for Science open today. In addition to the prize for the best scientist, we also have prizes for the best physical scientist, the best life scientist, and the best teachers in primary and secondary schools.
Does anyone know how Professor Blackburn first got interested in science? Because of one of her teachers, Nancy Hughes, a teacher whom she credits with igniting the passion for science back in her days at school in Launceston in Tasmania.
Having a good science teacher is very important for making children interested in science - and making sure that Australia continues to produce great scientists.
Australians have been responsible for many discoveries and inventions that we benefit from today.
Who here likes the internet? One of the technologies of wireless internet called WiFi was invented by an Australian team, led by a man called Dr John O'Sullivan.
Who here likes money? Australian scientists worked out how to make bank notes from polymer - which not only makes them much harder to counterfeit, but much more likely to survive a trip through the washing machine when you leave a $5 note in your pocket.
If Australians are going to make important discoveries and inventions in the future, we are going to need more children like you to study science.
Who here would like to find out what dinosaurs ate by studying fossilised dinosaur vomit? Who here would like to make Mitchell Johnson bowl faster or make sure Matt Giteau doesn't pull his quad muscle again? Who here would like to invent a paint that repairs itself when it gets scratched? Who here would like to find a cure for homework?
I'm not sure about that last one, but these are the types of things scientists are working on right now.
One of the great ways that we promote science around the country is National Science Week. It is held each year in August and reaches over a million Australians through more than 1,000 events.
Today the Innovation Minister announced $500,000 in Australian Government grants for National Science Week 2010. This money will go to schools, community groups, scientific societies, research organisations and others who - like me - are passionate about science.
They will use the money to support projects in every state and territory that demonstrate not just how important science is, but also how much fun it can be.
The CSIRO will take its Great Big Science Gig rock-cabaret to regional and metropolitan centres around the country. It shows how developments in science are making a real difference to our everyday lives.
The SCINEMA Festival of Science Film will see a program of short films about science and natural history screened in 400 venues throughout Australia. Screenings will be introduced by local scientists, who will give their own take on where the world of science is heading.
These are the sort of practical things we can do to make science more fun.
Another important part of making science fun is where we are now - Questacon. I'd like to thank all the people at Questacon for the effort they put into science education and awareness. Last year, more than 400,000 children and their families visited this building, and Questacon took outreach programs to 1,367 schools in all Australian states and territories. We need to get out into those remote areas because our next Elizabeth Blackburn may be in outback Australia.
Australia's future prosperity is dependent upon the knowledge and skills developed and attitudes fostered in our young people. The curious young minds - that we can all play a part in nurturing - will lead us through the challenges of the 21st century, and those curious minds need look no further than Professor Elizabeth Blackburn for inspiration.
Professor Blackburn, may I once again congratulate you on your achievement and thank you for your unwavering commitment to your mission.


In politics, words are very easy. Doing things is very hard. And what inspires me about your presence here this evening is that you are doing things. You are doing real things. You are providing opportunities to change people's lives and change them forever.
Sometimes, in the challenge of reconciliation, we lose heart. Sometimes we think it's all too hard. Sometimes we just think that for every success there are 10 failures, and why go on?
But what encourages me about your presence here this evening, and the 150 or so business leaders who were turned away from being here this evening, is the spirit of the nation is alive and well and wants to do things.
It doesn't want to emote about it, doesn't want to feel good about it - it wants to do things.
This is a very hard area. You all know that. That's why you have succeeded in the fields of endeavour which have brought you to this gathering this evening. It's a very hard area, and it therefore requires hard and determined people - hard and determined people whose heart is still tender and warm, and that again is the spirit I see present in this gathering this evening.
Whenever you feel discouraged, and I say this to my Indigenous brothers and sisters here this evening and to those of you from the non-Indigenous community, pause for a moment and reflect a bit on the journey on which we've come just over the last couple of years.
This is the place in which we apologised to the Stolen Generation, and we've had moving testimony this evening about the impact on just one of them. The thing that hit me in the heart from the Welcome to Country was the phrase "I grew up without knowing that Aboriginal people existed". How extraordinary. How frighteningly extraordinary.
But that is the reality from which we have come. It's a sad reality, it's a cruel reality, it's a heartless reality, and it's for that which we gathered as a nation on all sides of politics and from all parts of the country to simply say sorry - and we did.
But as I said on that occasion, words without deeds are but a clanging gong, a hollow symbol, and count for nothing. And that's where as a nation we embarked upon this journey called Closing the Gap.
I'll come to the practical parts of it in a minute. But when you lose heart, reflect on where we've come in just the last couple of years.
What really affected me just the other night was attending a football game on the Gold Coast in the great and incomparable State of Queensland. [Laughter] I had you all with me until that point. [More laughter]
So as I sat there with Jenny [Macklin] and with Twiggy [Forrest] and others, Linda Burney, Smiley [William Johnstone], folks from near and folks from far, I was absolutely stunned, the fact that we were there with a full stadium of people watching this game unfold. And the nation felt to me as if it was at one, wanting this enterprise to succeed, for which this game of football was an outward and visible sign of, to paraphrase the good nuns who taught Aunty [Ruth Bell] before, an inward and perhaps spiritual event.
Because there you had the world of rugby league, the NRL, the ARL, Smiley, the whole mob, out there on the field, Indig, non-Indig - it was great. Fantastic game of football, too, and the good guys won.
But you know something? The crowd loved it and the nation enjoyed it.
And so when you start to feel weighed down by it all, just step back every now and then and reflect that the spirit of getting this right is alive and well in the good people of Australia.
Now, to the practical business of what you are doing.
My first responsibility tonight is to each and every one of you, as Indigenous and non-Indigenous business leaders, is to say thank you. I mean it. I really do.
I'm married to a businesswoman. Creating a job doesn't happen like that. You operate under a bottom line. You operate with the disciplines of your banks; you operate with the disciplines of the marketplace; you operate with the disciplines of what your firm does best. And within all those constraints, what you have done as business leaders is to say 'we can make a difference'.
I just find that so encouraging, so inspiring.
Some may be just starting out on this particular journey. And I've met one or two this evening. Some are long seasoned in it and have seen the upsides and have seen the downsides and the waves on the way through. But you know, we are making a difference, because you are making a difference.
The huge firms we know something of - the BHPs and the Rios. Can I just say to large companies like that, and there are many of them here this evening and not just in the mining and resources sector, thank you for staying the course. It's good that you've done so.
I could say by reprimand that you started late, but I won't, because the nation started late. All of us started late.
But it is also the other businesses and the other firms in the financial services sector, in the manufacturing, retail, hospitality, tourism, right across the spectrum, people seeing where they are and realising what they can to transform a young Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander person's life.
So, seriously, and from my heart and from my head, thank you for that which you have done, that which you are doing, and that which you have resolved so to do.
The second is this - that I really do get it when so many of you say to me: "Kevin, we just to help. Our challenge is not throwing the doors open. We've overcome those barriers. Our challenge is finding the people." I get it. Most of us get it around this gathering this evening.
Which is why I'm equally inspired by what so many people here are doing this evening in school education and what comes after it. The great work being done in Queensland, and that's not in reference to the State - it actually was a reference to the extraordinary work being done in pioneering approaches to retaining kids at school. The extraordinary work being done in the West and now much more broadly by Gerard Neesham and the Clontarf Academy; the great work being done by Andrew Penfold, getting kids from Indigenous communities into the boarding schools of our country, and he mentioned to me just before the great work, I think, under Mark's [Arbib] portfolio of having now hundreds and hundreds of kids, Indigenous kids, in school-based apprenticeships.
So, in having the pipeline of people come through, can I say to each one of you engaged in that work at the coal face of what comes before school, of what's happening in our schools, and what is needed to keep kids at school and provide those pathways beyond school and through university and into the financial institutions to work - thank you, because that is one huge part of the jigsaw.
If I have a third thing to say tonight, it's kind of how we fit in, the Government. I was talking earlier this evening to Gerard Neesham, and, as you know, we are backing Clontarf, we are backing what Andrew Penfold's doing, we're backing what Twiggy Forrest is doing, we're backing what so many of you are doing around the country. But I was taken, in particular, by part of my conversation with Gerard about why it is that we in Government actually prefer to work with you beyond Government.
And that is because if we can bring our resources to bear, with continuity, with strength and with vigour, and persistence and certainty, the magic really happens when we harness that of people beyond Government and their passion and commitment, professional expertise and zeal. In Clontarf, we see that. I discovered, to my horror, how much money we're spending with Clontarf this evening. Someone should have given me the brief. Gerard, you've done very well - and so it is across the spectrum.
Didn't stop Gerard from asking for more, by the way - a lot more.
But you know something? It actually works well if we, creatively, are working with each other. Our job in Government when it comes to these great challenges of Closing the Gap, is to hold fast to the targets we must reach, be clear about them and be accountable in the progress that we are making towards them, but to be flexible and open about what each situation and each community demands as the local response and how you as individual firms and schools and school-related enterprises can best fit in.
It is that creative and dynamic partnership for which there is no perfect template, which, I think, will realise for us our greatest strength.
It's a long way off. Let's be honest about it. The tasks ahead are huge, the challenges formidable, but we are exploring a new way. The classic view, the Government does all, doesn't work. The alternative view, which is that random acts of philanthropic endeavour by those of you who feel virtue in your soul, it's great, but it's not comprehensive.
The creativity lies in bringing these two worlds together, and that is what we seek, in our own way, to do.
To the ministers who work with me on this, can I say to Jenny and to Mark and to others who are here, thank you. These two ministers, in particular, have their hearts and their minds fully engaged in this great enterprise, and I really would say to both of them in front of this audience how much I appreciate that work.
It's hard, it's difficult, and it can be discouraging, but with these ministers, let me tell you, you have an open door and through the Government a willing response in terms of things that work practically at the local level - and we mean it.
We will be held to account each year in this place when we, in the House of Representatives, deliver a report on or about the anniversary of the Apology to Indigenous people. The focusing thing about that report is that it is our national bottom line. It is our national balance sheet. It is our national reconciliation of accounts each year.
The targets we have set, the investments we've made, and the changes we have wrought or the failures that we have encountered. It's a good discipline for the nation, but we'd never, ever get there were it not for you making it happen in the field.
Aunty said in conclusion that she dreamt of the day when an Indigenous Australian will be Prime Minister of this country. You know something? I was first introduced to Closing the Gap on the 40th anniversary of the '67 referendum, at an event held down the road here at the Old Parliament House.
I didn't know much about Closing the Gap, to be quite honest, until I sat down with some Indigenous leaders who explained to me that it really had some horsepower. I also remember on that occasion we sang together 'From Little Things Big Things Grow' , and I think that's what we're doing here, changing all those lives, tens, then hundreds, then thousands, then tens of thousands. And that means within our lifetime Indigenous leaders in the ranks of politics, including the highest offices of the land, as should be the case.
Australian business, this journey is long and the difficulties will be great. But it won't happen without each of you fully hitched to the cart of reconciliation and what we can do for the future of the Indigenous people of this ancient land.
I thank you.
[ends]


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
I thank you all for your support in being here today to launch Organ Donor Awareness Week, and I can assure you that the Australian Government is absolutely committed to increasing the rate of organ and tissue donation in Australia and achieving world's best practice outcomes.
In July 2008 I announced the $150 million World's Best Practice Approach to Organ and Tissue Donation for Transplantation. 
The national reform plan has three core elements:
     * a coordinated, national approach to organ donation and transplantation;
     * dedicated clinical staff on the ground in all our major hospitals; and
     * increased community awareness about the importance of organ and tissue donation and the difference it can make.
I can tell you that the Australian Government is firmly committed to the full implementation of the Plan and increasing Australia's donation rates. We are working with governments in every state and territory, who are also committed to the plan through the Council of Australian Governments. Over the past 12 months we have laid the foundations of the new national system.
In order to spearhead the national reform process, we established the Organ and Tissue Authority on 1 January last year, and DonateLife agencies in each state and territory were formally established as a national network on 1 July last year. State medical directors are overseeing the clinical network in each jurisdiction and are linked back to the Organ and Tissue Authority.
The DonateLife network now has over 150 people on the ground, including new medical and nursing staff devoted to organ donation working in 76 local hospitals across the country.
Clinical triggers to underpin and improve the recognition of potential organ donors have been endorsed by:
     * the Australian and New Zealand Intensive Care Society
     * the Australian College of Emergency Medicine
     * the Australian College of Critical Care Nursing, and
     * the College of Intensive Care Medicine.
And these triggers are being implemented throughout the hospital system.
In addition, around 50 organisations have signed up to the National Communications Charter to enable consistent and coordinated community awareness and education activities.
The challenge of lifting Australia's organ donation and transplantation rates was never going to be an easy task, but the pieces of the jigsaw are now being carefully slotted into place and we can begin the work in earnest.
While we still have a long way to go before the levels of organ donation rise to where they need to be in this country, the early signs are encouraging. Many passionately committed and highly professional people are now working together to implement the national reform plan.
It is now time to ensure that the resources and systems which are being put in place equate to what matters most - more organ donors and more life-saving transplants. Now is the time for all elements of the new national system to pull together and focus on achieving world's best practice outcomes; to make sure that every potential donor is recognised within our hospital system and that their family is given the opportunity to have their loved one's intention to donate carried out; to promote the "discover, decide, discuss" message so that every family is clear about their loved one's wishes if a tragedy does occur.
Groups like Gift Of Life - who work tirelessly at the local level to raise awareness of organ donation within the community - have an important role to play, but each and every one of us also has a role: to lead our friends, our workmates or our families in a conversation about organ donation.
A conversation that encourages them to: Discover. Decide. Discuss, three simple words that can literally be the difference between life and death. While it is up to all of us to discover, decide and discuss, families also have a responsibility to respect each other's wishes, because the families of potential donors always make the final decision about whether organ donation can take place.
Glenys Cody had to make that decision, but luckily she had discussed organ donation with her family.
As a mum, she had that conversation with her boys Lachlan, Hayden and eldest son, Angus, and because of that conversation, there are at least three people out there who will be forever thankful to Angus, yet they never even met him, because when 14-year-old Angus died after an accident in 2008, Glenys was able to say with 100 per cent certainty that organ donation was what her young son wanted.
Glenys and her boys talked about how once you're gone, you don't need your organs anymore. The boys agreed wholeheartedly, so when Angus was on life support, Glenys did not hesitate for a second. She wanted to make sure that, despite the tragedy of Angus's death, it would not be a waste.
Donating Angus' organs helped with the grieving process because as, Glenys said:
"We didn't get the miracle we had hoped for...but somebody else and their family did."
Nobody wants to be in the situation of having a loved one die, and nobody wants the added pressure of 'guessing' their loved one's wishes about organ donation - and no doctor or nurse wants to add to that pressure.
Deputy Director of DonateLife ACT, Dr Greg Hollis, said, and I quote:
"Explaining and normalising the end-of-life process, with a focus on dignity and respect for the individual, is key to reassuring the family of the integrity of the process."
And Nicole Coleman, the Clinical Nurse Consultant for Organ and Tissue Donation for Hunter and New England Health, said that the new funding has reinvigorated performance and boosted morale, bringing new ideas and new enthusiasm. Ms Coleman said, and again I quote:
"That means the message getting further out into the community and that has already translated to more notifications of people willing to donate."
At this moment, there are more than 1,700 Australians on official waiting lists - people hoping and praying that someone out there had a conversation about organ donation with their family, just like Glenys and Angus did. People just like Dean Jobson who we saw with Chris in the session a little earlier today.
Dean is just your average knockabout bloke, but this average knockabout bloke has been waiting for a heart transplant for 19 months and while he waits he can't work. His dad has had to retire from his job to be Dean's carer and Dean can't get out and play the cricket and hockey that were such a big part of his sporting and social life.
Dean could wallow in self-pity, but he doesn't. He has this fantastic attitude. He said, and I quote:
"You'd go nuts if you thought about it too much. You've just got to live with the cards you've been dealt and I'd prefer to be alive and on a transplant waiting list than the alternative. I've still got a chance."
Dean and his family are registered donors because, in Dean's words "it's just the right thing to do."
It is the right thing to do.
Research consistently tells us that the vast majority of Australians support organ donation, but we need to make sure that this translates to people making their wishes known to their families. We need a cultural shift where discussion about organ donation becomes commonplace.
If someone makes an informed decision to not become a donor, they will not be condemned, but fear and a lack of knowledge of organ donation will condemn many of those on waiting lists to an uncertain future.
When we launched DonateLife last November, my family and I made the decision to become a DonateLife family: a family who discovers the facts about organ and tissue donation; a family who makes informed decisions about whether to become organ donors; a family who discusses each other's wishes.
I implore all Australian families to do the same.
One in two Australians don't know the wishes of their family members, and one in three Australians don't know that their family's consent is required for donation to proceed. The fact is that even if you are registered as a donor, your family will be asked to give consent for donation to take place. If all Australians knew their loved one's wishes, we would have a much higher family consent rate and we could save more lives.
Today I am pleased to launch a new resource to support families in having what can be a challenging conversation. The Family Discussion Kit is a practical guide to help families have that conversation. It:
     * provides facts about organ and tissue donation;
     * dispels some of the more commonly-held myths; and
     * shares stories of donor and recipient families.
The Family Discussion Kit is available as an online resource at www.donatelife.gov.au
If more Australian families discuss and accept each other's wishes about organ and tissue donation, we can achieve a higher family consent rate that our current rate of just 56 per cent. We can do better. 
I want to emphasise again that the Government is committed to delivering major improvements to organ donation rates across Australia. With the national reform plan well and truly underway, we look forward to realising the benefits of this united effort.
I know that will be a great achievement for everyone involved in this cause - community groups, such as Gift of Life, doctors, nurses and governments alike.
To all those here today who are travelling their own journey with organ donation or transplantation, I wish you well, and to those who wish to help raise awareness for organ donation, you can start by joining me on the Terry Connolly ORGANised walk tomorrow morning at 7am.
I thank Anne and Gift of Life for organising the walk tomorrow and this event today, and I thank all those with a passion for this cause for your year-round commitment to increasing awareness of organ donation.
It is now my pleasure to officially launch Australian Organ Donor Awareness Week.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY 
I acknowledge the Gadigal of the Eora Nation on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
This is a great project.
What the Indigenous Land Corporation has built here at the National Centre of Indigenous Excellence is a world-class facility and it symbolises the dawn of a new era in Indigenous education, engagement and leadership because the National Centre of Indigenous Excellence is a place that offers great hope, great opportunities, and great practical help for Indigenous Australians to reach their potential.
As the Centre's CEO, Jason Glanville has said, and I quote:
"We need to get away from the deficit language of disadvantage and have a real and meaningful conversation about excellence. This centre is about building hope for the next generations. We want profound outcomes."
Profound outcomes that have the power to change lives, now and in the future.
The Indigenous Land Corporation's $50 million investment in this centre is about more than just bricks and mortar. It represents a considerable social investment, too: an investment in the 5,000 or so Indigenous kids from communities across Australia who will come through this Centre every year; an investment in health and wellbeing, in sport, in the arts and culture; an investment in programs that will allow these kids to develop a sense of self-worth, a sense of self-respect, and a sense of self-reliance - the essential qualities of a productive, contributing member of the community.
Education will be the cornerstone of their success. We must improve the educational outcomes for Indigenous children.
As I said in my annual report on Closing the Gap to the federal Parliament earlier this month, the gap in meeting literacy and numeracy standards between Indigenous and non-Indigenous students is large - as much as 29.4 percentage points for Year 5 reading, which is why the intensive literacy tutorial centre that this Centre is running, in close partnership with Macquarie University and the Exodus Foundation, is so important.
The primary school kids who come through this program will get a real boost.
Over the course of the six month program, we're hopeful that their literacy levels will rise by up to two years.
That is a phenomenal outcome, and I can tell you that after speaking with the team here, they will not settle for anything less than phenomenal outcomes.
A couple of weeks ago, on the Gold Coast, I was lucky enough to see a magnificent game of football - the inaugural rugby league Indigenous All Stars match. This was a game of football which reminded us that winning is not just about the score line - even though the good guys won. It was a night reminded us of the power of sport to knock down barriers and inspire pride in Indigenous identity, and we know that some of the most effective programs for young Indigenous people are the ones linking sporting and education opportunities.
It's why we run the Sporting Chance Program, that program supports the excellent work of the Clontarf school-based sports academies, which are achieving school attendance rates of nearly 80 per cent and now have 2,300 students enrolled in 36 schools.
The Sporting Chance Program also supports the Former Origin Greats to establish school-based sports academies and their Achieving Results Through Indigenous Education (ARTIE) program, and the dedicated staff here are partnering with not-for-profit organisations to cultivate talent and create opportunities to develop brighter futures for our young people.
Organisations like:
     * the YMCA, which will operate the Eora Sports, Arts and Recreation Centre and Eora Campus;
     * the National Aboriginal Sporting Chance Academy will be on site here to deliver sport, wellbeing, learning and cultural programs; and
     * the Lloyd McDermott Rugby Development Team, which will run sports, wellbeing and personal development camps here at the Centre.
The Centre will also partner with the Australian Indigenous Mentoring Experience, whose objective is to increase Year 10, Year 12 and university admission rates for all Indigenous Australian students, because success at the NCIE is not all about academic achievement.
This Centre may stand for excellence, but it also stands for inclusiveness, growth and integrity. It is already helping to create a deeper and richer understanding of Indigenous culture in the wider community and one of the unexpected catalysts for that is the fantastic state-of-the-art public gym here at the Centre. In its first month, 900 members have joined up and more than half are Aboriginal.
What the staff here are really pleased about is that many of these members are older Indigenous men and women, who we know are over-represented in poor health statistics - people who have never set foot in a gym before but now they are using the gym regularly because the fact that all the operational staff in the gym are Indigenous has broken down the barriers for them.
Jason said, and I quote:
"Having blackfellas and whitefellas - particularly older Aboriginal men and women - training alongside each other is a powerful experience for both. This is true grassroots reconciliation in action."
As we know, from little things, big things grow.
It is no wonder then that the National Centre of Indigenous Excellence marks what many are calling the Renaissance of Redfern.
There is a very real sense of rejuvenation and renewal around this iconic suburb, a renewal that the Redfern community has worked towards for many years but which now has a focus and tangible symbol in the form of this Centre.
The NCIE is built on the site of the old Redfern Primary School and it provides a safe environment for young people across this country to engage, to learn and to be inspired - while offering job opportunities for Indigenous people.
I'm advised that the target for Indigenous employment was exceeded during the construction phase, with 35 Indigenous employment positions over the course of the project. It is anticipated that more than 30 Indigenous people will be employed in sport, recreation, youth and community programs, and hospitality when the Centre is fully operational.
These jobs are important to the Australian Government's commitment to closing the gap on Indigenous disadvantage, including halving the gap in employment outcomes between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians within a decade.
This means we need an additional 100,000 Indigenous Australians to find and keep jobs over the next nine years. We have a vested interest in making this happen - and not just because it is critical for social justice.
There is an equally strong economic argument for lifting workforce participation. Over the next 10 years, 130,000 young Indigenous Australians will enter the population of working age Australians.
We need to guarantee that they have the education and skills needed to move from school, TAFE and university into the workforce, and that they get a fair go when they look for a job.
Just the other night I attended the Business Leaders Forum in Canberra. This initiative was about getting governments, community leaders and business leaders together to talk about how we improve employment outcomes for Indigenous Australians.
We talked about opening doors and removing obstacles to employment, about changing company cultures to encourage effective recruitment and retention of Indigenous employees.
As I said, the Australian Government is committed to Closing the Gap and I am confident that the National Centre of Indigenous Excellence can play a significant positive role in helping us achieve that.
It is now two years and two weeks since the Apology to the Stolen Generations. We know the apology was not the end of the healing process. It was only the beginning.
But since the Apology, we have seen a renewed focus on creating opportunities for Indigenous people in this country.
We have committed our support for the establishment of the National Congress of Australia's First Peoples and continue to engage with Indigenous communities across Australia in a range of Closing the Gap initiatives and priorities.
In backing up this commitment, governments around Australia have committed over $4.6 billion in funding across a range of reforms to address chronic disease, housing conditions, employment, education and service delivery.
However, funding alone is not enough to make sure these gaps are closed - we need unprecedented cooperation from all sectors of the Australian community.
With the focus often placed on remote Indigenous communities, we won't close the gap if we don't also focus on the 75 per cent of Australia's Indigenous people who live in urban and regional areas.
All governments, families and communities have a duty to make sure our kids get the education needed to lead full, productive and rewarding lives so that all Australian can enjoy the same choices.
There is a really important word in this Centre's name: excellence.
I hope that word is a constant reminder to all who pass through these doors of just what can be achieved through hard work, the guidance of good people and the grasping of opportunities.
I wish the National Centre of Indigenous Excellence - its staff and students - every success.
I congratulate you on the first class facility that you have built.
I congratulate you, in advance, for the heights you will reach, and I congratulate you for creating a place where the hopes and dreams of Indigenous Australia will be encouraged and nurtured.
It is now my pleasure to officially declare open the National Centre of Indigenous Excellence.



I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
It's an honour to join you on this sacred ground for the Australian Labor Party.
The site of past election campaign launches by Don Dunstan.
The man who represented Norwood in Parliament for more than a quarter of a century.
The man recognised as among the greatest Labor leaders and the greatest Australian Premiers.
The man who transformed South Australia - building a modern, sophisticated, confident and outward-looking South Australia that became a beacon for the nation.
Today, the bloke who started political life working for Don Dunstan, returns to the Norwood Town Hall.
As your leader.
As your Premier.
And seeking a fresh mandate from the people of South Australia.
Mike is Australia's most experienced Premier.
Mike Rann is an unapologetic champion for South Australia.
Most importantly, Mike is a leader who has delivered for South Australia.
With new industries.
New businesses.
New jobs for a new generation of South Australians.
In short a new vision for South Australia's future.
Friends, eight years ago, before Mike Rann became Premier, it was a different story for this state.
South Australia's unemployment rate was above the nation's average, at 7.2 per cent.
Kids were leaving to find jobs elsewhere.
And South Australians were worrying about their future.
Eight years later, things have changed.
Unemployment is just 4.4 per cent - well below (and no longer above) the nation's average.
The number of jobs in South Australia has grown by almost 20 per cent - as young people now stay rather than giving up and leaving the state.
And major projects are now coming to South Australia - not leaving South Australia, as in the past.
Friends, South Australia has experienced one of the greatest transformations of any state in the Federation.
And this is not an accident.
It's the result of Mike Rann, his cabinet and his government, working, working, working.
Providing strong leadership.
Providing responsible economic management.
And Mike always leading from the front.
But all this could be put at risk if an untested, ill-prepared and risky Liberal Party is allowed to slide back into power on March 20.
Friends, in the two years since the new Australian Government came to office nationally, we have built a strong partnership with the Rann Government.
Partnership is not a word.
Partnership is a fact.
Partnership investing in nation-building infrastructure.
A partnership in bringing the jobs and industries of the future to this great state.
And partnership in helping secure the future of South Australia's water supply.
From the day we established Infrastructure Australia, to set national priorities for infrastructure investment, Mike was the first Premier beating down my door.
And from the beginning, one thing was clear.
When Mike comes with an idea or proposal - it's never sloppy or half-baked.
It's worked out, thought through and carefully costed.
That's why South Australia's plans were among the first projects in the nation to be endorsed by Infrastructure Australia.
Since we came to office nationally, the Australian Government's investment in road and rail infrastructure in South Australia has increased by 264 per cent, compared to the Howard Government.
Like the Australian Government's $500 million investment in the South Road upgrade.
Almost $300 million for the electrification of Gawler rail line north.
$291 million to extend the Noarlunga rail line south down to Seaford.
$61 million investment million to extend the Adelaide O-Bahn road right into the heart of the city.
Our investment through the Local Government Reform Fund in four projects here in Adelaide - to develop new, innovative approaches to long-term city planning.
And let's never forget about our partnership on water.
Our investment of $328 million to double the capacity of Adelaide's desalination plant - powered by renewable energy - a plant capable of securing half of Adelaide's future water needs.
Do you know, the previous Federal government never invested a dollar in urban rail or urban water.
Not a single dollar.
That has now changed.
And changed fundamentally.
And if you want evidence of what partnership is all about - it's about real projects on the ground that would make a real different to the lives of working families.
I said before the transformation of South Australia has been profound.
And nowhere is this more evident than in the transformation of the South Australian economy.
An economy now diversifying into high-value industries and high-skilled jobs.
Transforming the economy from traditional manufacturing into high-tech manufacturing, major defence projects, renewable energy and advanced industries to support mining and information technology.
Industries that are driving the future growth of this economy.
And industries that are generating high-skilled, rewarding jobs for our kids today and for future generations.
Of course, little of this would have been possible had we stood idly by last year as economies around the world fell like nine pins.
As millions of workers in Europe and America lost their jobs - and still remain out of work.
Together with Mike's government, we decided to make a difference.
The Australian Government has made a $4.2 billion investment in South Australia through our nation-building infrastructure stimulus plan.
The result for the nation (and for South Australia) - among the major advanced economies.
The highest growth.
The second lowest unemployment rate.
The lowest debt.
The lowest deficits.
And the only one not to go into recession.
Indeed, in the last financial year South Australia grew by 1.4 per cent.
The second highest growth rate in the nation.
And a country mile ahead of the rest of the world.
And while the auto industry was collapsing around the world, we did it differently in Australia.
We did it differently in South Australia.
The Australian Government's $6.2 billion New Green Car Plan is securing future jobs and future opportunities for local car manufacturing.
Just over twelve months ago, I visited the heart of Australia's $7 billion automotive industry in Elizabeth to launch an all-new, fuel-efficient, low-emission small car - the result of a $149 million co-investment with Holden.
This is a great win for South Australian manufacturing.
For Australian manufacturing.
For family budgets.
And for the environment. 
So you ask what partnership means.
It's not a slogan.
It's a reality.
And one that makes a real difference on the ground to the needs of working families.
We've increased our investment in health and hospitals here in South Australia by 43 per cent compared to the Howard Government.
We're investing in an education revolution, including $1.4 billion in the biggest school modernisation project ever seen in this state - spread across 789 schools.
And we're tackling the huge challenge of securing South Australia's future water supply.
For too long, this challenge was neglected both by the Commonwealth, the eastern states and previous governments of this state.
But now the challenge is being tackled head-on.
For the first time, the Australian Government has now committed over $1 billion to new water infrastructure projects in South Australia.
For the first time, we are also buying back water rights to restore our rivers to better health.
We have now secured the purchase of 797 gigalitres of water entitlements at a cost of $1.27 billion - despite strong opposition from the Liberals.
And for the first time, we have a Commonwealth Minister with national responsibility for the overall cap on the Murray Darling and a Basin-wide plan to give effect to that cap.
And that minister is a South Australian - Senator Penny Wong.
Nobody deserves more credit for the changes in national water policy than Mike Rann.
Mike has been unrelenting in demanding South Australia gets its fair share.
Just ask the Victorians.
Of course there's no quick fixes - we all know that.
South Australia's challenges with water shortages have been accumulating for well over a century.
But finally, there's real action underway.
So you ask what partnership means.
It means what we have done together in just two short years on the economy, on infrastructure, on schools, on hospitals and on water.
The absolute basics of what governments must be about.
Friends, Mike Rann is the bloke who's taken this state from being behind the pack.
And he's put South Australia out in front.
He's got plans for South Australia's future.
And deserves to be able to finish the job.
And as Prime Minister, I look forward to working with him to deliver for South Australia's future.
It's my pleasure to introduce to you my friend, the Premier of South Australia, Mike Rann. 


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
Today we honour courage.
Today we honour sacrifice.
Today we honour compassion.
These are the noblest human values. These are the noblest Australian values.
These are the values that shine like a winter star, for this is a story which must be told and told and told again, because in the story of the Centaur we see the worst and best of humanity at work.
Today we honour all those who lost their lives on the Australian Hospital Ship Centaur and we honour those who survived, floating on rafts clinging to wreckage, praying for rescue.
We honour the families whose lives were torn apart by this cold, brutal, inhuman act of sinking a hospital ship, the families who then waited two-thirds of a century to discover the final resting place of their loved ones.
The images from the ocean floor that we saw a few short months ago when the wreck of the Centaur was discovered were a voyage through time - and the voyages of time: the ship's bell; the sprung frames of hospital beds; a lone soldier's boot; the vivid red of the hospital cross on the ship's hull, this cross, the Red Cross; the Australia slouch hat that sits motionless on the ocean bed alongside the wreck standing almost as a silent sentinel to the atrocities of war.
All of these things of the deep are silent, eloquent, permanent reminders of the violence meted upon the men and women of the Centaur just before dawn on that autumn day 67 years ago.
Let us be clear: sinking an unarmed hospital ship, clearly marked with the internationally recognised symbol of the Red Cross, is a violation of international law.
No ifs. No buts. No maybes.
But more than that - it is a complete violation of the most basic principles of human decency.
No ifs. No buts. No maybes.
The Centaur was a vessel of mercy and it was suck without mercy by a vessel of war, and its wreck will forever be a sepulchre for those 268 souls who perished, a memorial to the 75 merchant navy personnel, 193 Australian service men and women, doctors, nurses, orderlies, cooks and stewards.
Designated now as a war grave. Now protected ever more from intrusion. Forever now a sacred place. Forever now a reminder that the preservation of your freedom was purchased with the blood, the sweat and the tears of those who came before us.
Forever also a reminder of how close the war came to our own shores, to Australian shores to Queensland shores, because Centaur, while perhaps less known elsewhere in the nation, has always occupied a special place in the hearts of Queenslanders.
We felt as if our own home, barely 70 miles from where we are today, had been violated.
Today's service reminds us too of that thread of time that links the past to the present, for though the Centaur was lost 67 years ago, not until today has our nation been able to pay its respects formally to those who were lost and to share in the searing memories of those who survived.
Some of those survivors are still with us - survivors like Martin Pash, who is here with us today, who I had the honour to meet before the service, and Bob Westwood and Matty Morris, who are marking today privately.
But most are no longer with us.
People like Second Mate Richard Gordon Rippon, whose navigational skills were vindicated years later when his original calculations - made 40 minutes before the torpedo attack - steered David Mearns' search team to within one nautical mile of the Centaur's resting place.
People like Captain Richard Salt, who was about to retire but was persuaded to make one more trip - with the Centaur.
People like Sister Nell Savage, who symbolised the ANZAC spirit of resilience in adversity, ignoring her own injuries to care for other survivors and to boost flagging morale as they waited and waited and waited in the water and awarded the George Medal - recognising a woman who signed on to be a healer, not a hero.
Nothing now can change what happened in those brief, fateful moments 67 years ago, and nothing can replace the years of loss and uncertainty for friends and families, but my hope, and the hope of the nation, is that the discovery of the Centaur can bring peace of mind and the possibility of healing of souls.
You know now the final resting place of your loved ones after so many, many decades. That is why we became involved in the search.
Many of you sitting in this Cathedral today are thinking of a loved one - a parent or grandparent, an uncle or aunt, a friend or a mate. This service is a chance to remember them, and to honour them, and to acknowledge their service to Australia.
This is a day for the nation to honour them just as we do today here in this great Cathedral, so too do others across the nation with us, to write one final chapter in the Centaur's history because in this great Australian family, Centaur is part of us now, just as we are part of Centaur.
Her story is our nation's story.
Lest we forget. 


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY 
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
The Australian Government is delivering on the basics.
This morning's National Accounts confirmed once again that we have kept the Australian economy growing strongly - while other economies around the world remain devastated by the global recession.
Earlier this week, we delivered on our commitment to launch the first national curriculum for schools in our nation's history - a curriculum grounded in teaching the basics and one delivered after two years of effort after thirty years of failure.
Today, we turn our attention to health.
Today we are delivering on the most significant reform of Australia's health and hospital system since the introduction of Medicare almost three decades ago.
Starting today, the Australian Government will build a new National Health and Hospital Network to deliver better health and better hospitals for all Australians.
The Government will deliver better hospitals by establishing a national network, that is funded nationally, and run locally.
For the first time in history the Australian Government will take on the dominant funding role for the entire public hospital system.
For the first time, eight state-run systems will become part of one national network.
And there will be one set of tough national standards to drive and deliver better hospital services.
The Australian Government's decision to take on the dominant funding role for the entire public hospital system is designed to:
End the blame game.
Eliminate waste.
And to shoulder the funding burden of the rapidly rising health costs of the future.
The hospital system will be run through Local Hospital Networks.
These Networks will bring together small groups of hospitals in a local area, where local professionals, with local knowledge, are given the necessary powers to deliver better hospital services to their local community.
To fund this Network, the Australian Government will take around one-third of the GST revenues and place it in a new National Hospital Fund to be spent only on health and hospitals.
The Australian Government will take on the dominant share of funding future demands on the system.
At the moment we pay around 35 cents in every dollar of public hospital growth funding. Under our reform plan, we will be funding around 60 cents in every dollar.
This is a comprehensive package that I will put to the States and Territories at COAG on April 11.
My message to them is simple: work with the Australian Government, work with the doctors, nurses and other health professionals of Australia who want reform, work with the clinical leadership of our local hospitals who also want reform - and together deliver better hospitals and better health care for all Australians.
If the states and territories do not sign up to fundamental reform, then my message is equally simple: we will take this reform plan to the people at the next election - along with a referendum by or at that same election to give the Australian Government all the power it needs to reform the health system.
The Australian Government's position is clear.
It also gives effect to my commitment to the Australian people at the last election.
Health and hospital reform cannot, must not, and will not be put off to some distant point in the future.
It must begin now.
The purpose of our plan is simply this: better hospitals, and better healthcare, for all Australians.
This is the single purpose of the new National Health and Hospitals Network (NHHN) we are announcing today.
We will deliver on this commitment by establishing a national network, that is funded nationally, and run locally.
Our plan deals with the reasons why so many Australians seem to fall through the cracks in our current health system.
I share the frustration of patients.
I share the frustration I have heard from our doctors and nurses.
I've heard the stories in hospital after hospital.
? There is too much blame and fragmentation, making it hard for patients to work out which level of Government is responsible for the care they need.
? Too many patients are receiving uncoordinated care because of the lack of integration between hospitals and out-of-hospital services.
? Too many mums and dads can't find proper health care for their kids if they happen to get sick out of normal business hours (which they normally do).
? Too many of our public hospitals are struggling as demand on the system is rapidly outweighing the supply - with one in three emergency department patients, and almost one in six elective surgery patients, waiting for longer than the recommended time for treatment.
? Too many of our local clinical leaders are not adequately involved in decisions about the delivery of health and hospital services in their local communities, when they invariably know best.
And underneath it all, because the current system is a total mess in the organisational relationship between the Commonwealth and the states, there is just too much duplication, overlap and waste.
Failure to fundamentally fix the system would mean that a large part of future investments in the system would be wasted.
Let's give the current problems a human face.
Let's imagine a 67 year old man who is retired and lives in the outer suburbs of one of our major cities.
He's just been placed on a waiting list to get a hip replacement at his local hospital but he's been told there's a wait of around 12 months.
That's 12 months of living with pain, poor mobility and having to rely on his wife to get around.
On the same day a 45 year old woman with a similar hip problem living in another major city, was told that her local hospital could give her a hip replacement in 5 weeks.
Two different people, both in capital cities - but very different standards of care.
The new National Health and Hospital Network aims to deliver a set of national standards, including access to elective surgery.
This means both would get their operations done within a similar timeframe.
If one of them can't get it at their local hospital then the Local Hospital Network will find that person a bed at another hospital within the Network - or with a private hospital if one can't easily be found.
The National Health and Hospitals Network will also recognise that patient needs are best served by empowering our dedicated health professionals.
Imagine the situation of two clinicians at a hospital in regional Australia.
They have pioneered the development of new services for elderly patients with multiple illnesses, based on their knowledge of local health needs.
Their work has reduced hospital admissions and improved the health outcomes of elderly patients who frequently visit their local hospital.
Both clinicians would like to take this pilot into a much larger program for their hospital.
They have been waiting for the bureaucrats in a capital city health department to give them the go-ahead on this program for more than two years.
Under the new National Health and Hospitals Network, the clinicians can approach their clinical representative directly.
Providing their new program meets national clinical standards, the Local Hospital Network - which is more likely to recognise the relevance of the program for the local community - can decide to expand the pilot and make it part of that hospital's day to day operations.
In other words, a new level of local control over the delivery of health services.
In both scenarios, the new National Health and Hospitals Network is designed to deliver better hospitals and better health care.
Doctors want this.
Nurses want this.
And so do the patients totally frustrated by waiting lists or not being able to get on to waiting lists in the first place.
Before the 2007 election, I made a commitment that if elected to government, we would tackle the challenge of reform of the health and hospital system.
That we would end the buck-passing and the blame game.
And that instead, on the reform and the future of the health and hospital system, the buck would stop with me.
Today, the Australian Government honours that commitment.
Today, I honour that commitment.
Each and every word.
Health reform, we know, is one of the greatest long-term challenges facing Australia.
Every day, hundreds of thousands of Australians rely on our health and hospital system to provide quality care for themselves and their families.
Every year, Australians make more than 115 million visits to the local doctor.
Every year, they make use of 54 million hospital services spread across the nation's 762 public hospitals.
Australia's health system employs around 740,000 workers, or one out of every 14 Australian employees - including 60,000 doctors and 230,000 nurses.
In building the new National Health and Hospitals Network for the future, the Australian Government is undertaking a massive reform.
But we do not shrink from that challenge one bit.
The time for fundamental reform is now.
But in rising to the challenge of reform, we are building on that which we have already delivered in our first two years in office:
? A 50 per cent increase in hospital funding over the next five years in the Australian Health Care Agreement - a $64 billion investment.
? An unprecedented $1.1 billion investment in training more doctors, nurses and health professionals, including a 35 per cent increase in GP training places.
? A rural doctors incentive scheme that now extends to 500 additional communities and 2,400 additional doctors to encourage them to stay in the bush.
? For the first time, the Australia Government is investing more than $1.8 billion directly in expanding emergency departments, post-acute care and elective surgery.
? Establishing 36 GP super clinics across the nation to provide flexible, integrated care in local communities.
? And, for the first time, the Australian Government is investing directly in the capital needs of local hospitals.
We have also taken action to put the health system on a more sustainable footing, including by rebalancing support for private health insurance for high income Australians - a fiscally responsible measure that the Opposition last week again blocked in the Senate, despite its potential to free up $100 billion for our health budget over the next 40 years.
The reforms we have delivered so far are helping tackle the immediate pressures in our health and hospitals system - our emergency departments, elective surgery waiting lists and workforce shortages.
But they are just the beginning.
There is much, much more to be done.
That's why two years ago, not long after coming to office, I commissioned the most comprehensive structural review of the operation of the health system in 20 years.
Today we are joined by Dr Christine Bennett who led that review and I take this opportunity to thank Christine and the members of the National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission for their work.
The Commission concluded in July last year that the health and hospital system is fragmented, is at a tipping point and is unable to cope with the challenges it faces in the years ahead.
In the words of the Commission, "now is the time to act".
Having received and absorbed the Commission's work, the Government over the last six months engaged in a comprehensive consultation process involving more than 100 forums around the nation - 21 of which I attended.
Today I want to thank the doctors, nurses, allied health professionals, health administrators and other passionate advocates who attended these consultations and shared freely their time and wisdom.
Our consultations underscored the need for reform - with the overriding theme of a stronger Australian Government role, coupled with higher national standards and increased funding for public hospitals.
In addition to the Commission's Report, the 2010 Intergenerational Report highlighted that our health and hospitals system is not adequately prepared for future challenges - with the combination of an ageing and growing population, the increased burden of chronic disease, ongoing workforce shortages and rising costs.
Based on the same data, Treasury has concluded that by 2045-46, spending on health and hospitals would consume the entire revenue raised by state governments.
This means that states would not be able to fund their health and hospital system, let alone meet their other responsibilities.
Once again, the time for action is now.
The clear message of both the National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission and the Intergenerational Report is that the system needs reform that is fundamental - not just incremental.
Reform that for the first time enables eight state-run systems to become part of a single national network, using consistent national standards to drive and deliver better hospital services.
Funded nationally.
Run locally.
The National Health and Hospitals Network contains seven major reforms.
For the first time, the Australian Government will take on the dominant funding responsibility for all Australia's public hospitals from the states because the states simply cannot afford to fund the future growth of the system.
The Australian Government's funding share will almost double, from 35 per cent today to 60 per cent into the future - equating to an additional $11 billion per year from next year.
The Australian Government will take clear financial leadership in the hospital system, permanently funding 60 per cent of the efficient price of every public hospital service provided to public patients.
We will fund 60 per cent of recurrent expenditure on research and training functions undertaken in public hospitals.
We will fund 60 per cent of capital expenditure - both operating and planned new capital investment - to maintain and improve public hospital infrastructure.
No previous Australian Government has accepted any responsibility for the funding of hospital infrastructure - let alone 60 per cent.
Over time, we will also pay up to 100 per cent of the efficient price of 'primary care equivalent' outpatient services provided to public hospital patients.
These reforms will permanently reverse the decline in the Australian Government funding contribution for public hospital services over the last decade.
They will put an end to the tiresome cycle of the blame game between the Australian Government and the states over hospital funding.
In exchange for relieving pressures on State budgets, the Australian Government will require system-wide reforms to create a better integrated, unified national health and hospitals network, with national standards, national transparency and national accountability.
Right now, too many patients find themselves shunted from one part of the health system to another.
Under the National Health and Hospitals Network, for the first time, the Australian Government will take full funding responsibility for all GP and GP-related services delivered outside hospitals.
Because one level of government will be responsible for both the majority of hospitals costs and all of primary care, more people will be treated outside of hospitals - as they often should be.
With the Australian Government paying more of the hospital bills, it will have the incentive to make sure people are treated through less expensive and more appropriate primary care services.
This is instead of shunting patients into expensive hospital services predominantly paid for by another level of government - albeit paid by the same, long-suffering taxpayer.
That's what I mean by ending cost shift and the blame game.
With the Australian Government responsible for all primary health care services, we can finally deliver better integrated, better coordinated healthcare that is more responsive to the needs of patients.
This is what we have already begun to do through the creation of GP Super Clinics.
Once again, this is but the first step.
By taking full funding and policy responsibility for primary care we can also reduce the number of unnecessary hospital admissions that could be avoided through providing better care in the community - estimated at around 441,000 admissions, or 9.3 per cent of total hospital admissions every year.
Bad for patients.
Bad too for the taxpayer.
To help fund these reforms, we will rebalance financial responsibility in the Federation by dedicating around one-third of GST revenue directly to a new National Hospitals Fund.
The Australian Government will also take the dominant responsibility for funding the future growth of the system.
These funds - in the order of $90 billion over the first five years of the new arrangements - will be dedicated entirely to hospital investments.
We estimate this is likely to cost the Australian national budget a further $15 billion over the decade which would otherwise be borne by the states.
This reform will also significantly address the vertical fiscal imbalance in the federation.
If we fail to address this imbalance, the level of government with the least efficient tax base will continue to bear the burden of the fastest growing area of public expenditure (that is, hospitals) - with detrimental effects for the national economy.
The Australian Government is determined to end the blame game in hospitals and health.
And that's why the Australian Government is putting its own skin in the game.
But under this plan it is important that the States have some skin in the game too - to provide a strong incentive for States to better manage hospital systems and ensure they do not have any reason to start to withdraw money from their health budgets.
To strengthen accountability within the health system, the Australian Government will develop strong national standards for patient care and publish performance statistics for the nation's hospitals - leveraging its increased funding responsibility to deliver a better standard of care.
For the first time there will be nationally consistent performance standards for hospitals in critical areas such as emergency departments and elective surgery, to help reduce waiting times for the public.
For the first time, Australians will also have access to information about how hospitals and health providers are performing - including safety and quality measures, such as the level of adverse events and hospital acquired infections.
These standards will create a more transparent and accountable health system for the Australian taxpayer.
While health and hospital services will be funded nationally - they will be run locally.
For the first time, Local Hospitals Networks, run by local health, financial and managerial professionals, rather than state or, for that matter, federal bureaucrats, will be put in charge of running the hospital system.
The Australian Government will require the establishment of Local Hospital Networks across the country.
The Australian Government will, in time, also fund Local Hospital Networks directly.
Payments will therefore bypass state bureaucracies and empower local clinical leaders to flexibly tailor health services to local needs and local populations.
If local clinical leadership of a hospital can better deliver services locally and save money, they should be allowed to re-invest what they save in the further delivery of services.
This has been a strong and consistent call from clinical leaders across Australia.
Local Hospital Networks will bring together small groups of local hospitals within a geographic or functional connection, who will manage their own budget, deliver coordinated patient care and be held directly accountable for their performance.
Local Hospital Networks will have a professional Governing Council with clinical representatives, and a CEO who is empowered to make day to day operational decisions, and who is accountable for health outcomes.
A system based on Local Hospital Networks will encourage cooperation in delivering better health care coordination across a population area - particularly with local primary care and aged care providers.
In many states, existing regional health bodies are too remote from local decision making.
The creation of Local Hospital Networks will substitute these arrangements and will not be allowed to result in any net addition to bureaucracy - because as a condition of funding, any increase in the number of local staff working at Local Hospital Networks must be matched by a reduction in head office staff numbers in health departments and regional bureaucracies
And staff will be located in local hospitals themselves.
The Government will pay Local Hospital Networks directly for each service they provide, rather than simply providing block funding to the States.
Payments will be made directly, on the basis of an efficient price per hospital service, determined by an independent national umpire.
Currently, the Australian Government provides block hospital funding to states, who then determine how and where this money is spent.
This is like providing a blank cheque.
In the past, neither the Australian taxpayer nor the Australian Government had any idea where the money went.
Or even if it all went to hospitals.
This must stop.
Under the new arrangements, each Local Hospital Network will be funded for every service they provide to a patient.
Alongside our measures to improve transparency and accountability in service delivery, this reform will foster a culture of innovation and self-improvement
It will become easier to identify the best-run hospitals, who will be able to share their expertise and innovations with other hospitals.
This reform will drive hospitals to eliminate waste and will mean that patients will not be pushed out of the hospitals system - as hospitals are paid a fair price for every service delivered.
In addition to the fundamental structural reforms I have announced today, the Australian Government will also take on the dominant role for the future growth of the system beyond a simple linear projection of GST payments.
The gap between GST growth and projected hospital spending growth on a no-policy change basis must still be met. And that is where the Australian Government must step in.
Within this framework of fundamental reform, further initiatives must also be embraced in the future including:
? the inadequacy of hospital bed numbers now including specific problems in emergency departments, elective surgery and sub-acute care;
? further reforms in the expansion of primary care;
? the undersupply of doctors, nurses and other health professionals;
? the inadequacy of electronic health records across the system; and
? preventative health care, aged care, mental health and dental services.
These also formed part of the National Health and Hospital Reform Commission's deliberations.
The Government is also signalling today that we will be acting in these areas in the future.
But further significant investment in these critical areas must be built on the basis of the fundamental reforms to the system that are part of the National Health and Hospitals Network.
Reform is essential.
You can paint a wall with the most expensive paint in the hardware store.
But before you pick up a paintbrush, you have to do the preparation. You have to strip off the old wallpaper and see what's underneath. You have to sand the walls and repair the cracks first.
Because if you don't, the wall might look alright for a couple of months, but the cracks and the flaws will reappear.
And you'll end up having to repaint that wall time after time.
Our health system has cracks and flaws. Some of them we can see, some of them are under the paint.
And those flaws have been repainted and papered over for too long.
We're doing the preparations now. With the structural reforms I am announcing today, we can go on to build and extend a health system for the 21st century.
We can do this together - with the doctors, nurses and other health professionals who want reform - and with the sign up of the states and territories.
And if the states and territories do not sign up, then we will take this reform plan to the people at the next election - along with a referendum by or at that same election to give the Australian Government all the power it needs to reform the health system.
What I have outlined today is also a landmark reform to one of the most important sectors of the Australian economy:
I think the Australian people have been waiting too long for health reform.
So today, Australia has a choice.
We can continue blaming others when things go wrong.
Or we can take the hard road of reform.
Building a new Health and Hospitals Network is fundamental to building a stronger and fairer Australia.
A stronger Australia because better health and better hospitals are critical for workforce participation, for productivity and for the efficient use of public finance.
A fairer Australia because if you don't have universal access to quality health care, the fair go has gone back out the door.
Just like it did with WorkChoices.
And we all know from history how ideologically hostile our political opponents have been towards universal health care in the past.
I know health and hospital reform won't be easy.
It never has been.
It'll be one of the hardest reforms that the Government will tackle.
But this Government is working hard to build Australia's future.
We are proud of our record of achievements in keeping the economy going.
We are proud of what we are achieving in education.
And we know what we must now achieve in health.
A National Health and Hospital Network, that is funded nationally and run locally, is about delivering the basics.
And this Government intends to get on with the job. 


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY 
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
It's an honour to join you today as the people of this great state prepare to make their choice for Tasmania's future and I'm delighted to be here to introduce my friend, the Premier of Tasmania, David Bartlett.
David has brought to the office of Premier a fresh vision for building a strong Tasmania: for the jobs and industries of the future; for supporting every Tasmanian child to achieve their full potential; for quality health care for all.
Friends, these are the right priorities for a stronger Tasmania, and that's why David Bartlett deserves to win on 20 March.
Friends, Tasmania today is a different state to what it was in the '80s and '90s.
There's a sense of self-assurance; a sense of direction; new job; new opportunities; a confidence that Tasmania's best days lie ahead.
Just think of the change Tasmania has achieved.
Before Labor came to office in 1998, Tasmania had the highest unemployment anywhere in Australia. The unemployment rate was 10.6 per cent, compared to an average of 7.8 per cent nationwide.
Today, things are different. Tasmania's unemployment rate is just 5.2 per cent and it's below the nation's average.
The number of jobs has grown by almost 20 per cent. The population has reached 500,000 - and growing.
Tasmania's economic growth rate in the last financial year was the second highest in the nation - and for the first time in history, a Tasmanian is captaining the Australian cricket team. And Ricky Ponting has led Australia to more test victories than any other skipper as well being one of the greatest batsmen in the history of the game.
Tasmanians are right to be proud of the achievements of the past 12 years, but this is no time to look backwards - and David is not looking backwards. He's looking ahead: to future challenges; to building a stronger Tasmania; a Tasmania ready for the future with new jobs, better services and greater opportunities for a new generation of Tasmanians.
Friends, I'm proud to have worked together with David since he became Premier almost two years ago: investing in Tasmania's education revolution; improving hospitals and health care for communities across the state; putting Tasmania first in the nation with the National Broadband Network.
Just look at our record, working together.
Together, we took early and decisive action to protect working families from the impact of the global economic recession. The Australian Government's Nation Building Economic Stimulus plan contained a $1.4 billion stimulus to the Tasmanian economy and we've worked hand-in-hand with David's government to deliver the stimulus plan.
Its results are palpable. As the Treasury and the Reserve Bank of Australia have said, it was the Australian Government's stimulus plan that kept our economy from falling into recession last year. Thousands of families across Tasmania have been saved from losing their jobs; saved from the distress of not meeting the mortgage payments; saved from the anxiety about being able to pay for essentials like school uniforms, car insurance and electricity bills; and saved from the uncertainty of searching for work in a climate where around the world, unemployment has been soaring.
We took action, we made a difference and we saved thousands of jobs. We did it because we're Labor. We stand up for working families. When times get tough, we're determined to do all we can to keep Tasmanians in work, just as we're determined to give every child the best opportunities for the future and to provide for those who cannot work - the sick, the elderly, those with disabilities - with quality care and support, and that includes the 85,000 Tasmanian pensioners who benefited from our $35 per week increase in the single age pension, and the $15 increase for couples.
Today, the government of Premier Bartlett and the government I lead are working closely together to build a stronger Tasmania.
Last week I announced the most significant reforms to our health and hospital system since Medicare almost three decades ago.
The Australian Government is committed to ending the blame-game, the cost-shifting and the inefficiencies that plague our health system. As I announced, we will build a National Health and Hospitals Network - funded nationally, run locally.
I welcome Premier Bartlett's positive response to our plans, and I look forward to working with him on the details of our reforms in the months ahead, but in the meantime, we're continuing to work together to build a stronger health and hospitals system today.
The Australian Government has increased our investment in health and hospitals here in Tasmania by 49 per cent compared to the Howard Government. Under our healthcare agreement, we've increased our investment from $930m to $1.4 billion:
     * Our investment in extra elective surgery procedures took 1606 people off the waiting lists in 2008.
     * We've put $3.1 million into new equipment for Royal Hobart, Launceston and North West Region hospitals.
     * And we're investing $15.5 million in four GP Super Clinics in Burnie, Devonport, Sorrell and Clarence.
We're investing in an education revolution, increasing the Australian Government's investment in Tasmania's schools and education system by 197 per cent compared to the last four years of the Howard Government:
     * That includes $439 million in the biggest ever school modernisation project in Tasmania, with 599 projects across 272 schools.
     * It includes funding for 6,300 computers in 103 schools.
     * And $37 million allocated for Trades Training Centres at 32 schools.
We're getting on with the job, supporting new infrastructure where it's most needed:
     * The national investment in Tasmanian transport infrastructure is up 63 per cent in our first two years in office, compared to the last two years of the previous government.
     * The Government's Nation Building Program has delivered almost $800 million for road and rail projects, including key Midland Highway investments such as the much-needed Brighton Bypass.
     * And we're investing in safer Tasmanian roads, with funding for road safety measures at 40 rail crossing and road accident black spots.
We're investing in local community infrastructure like the night lights at Bellerive Oval so that more Tasmanians can share one of life's great joys - watching a Ricky Ponting double century - as I did in January.
And last week we announced a $12.5 million boost to Tasmania's tourism industry through an upgrade of the Three Capes Track.
We're also investing in affordable housing for Tasmanians who most need it - building 514 new homes, at a cost of $125 million.
Friends, this is action that's delivering for Tasmania: better hospitals, new school halls and classrooms, new infrastructure and affordable housing, real investments that are building a stronger Tasmania and the results of a strong working relationship with David Bartlett and his team.
Friends, there is no greater example of us working together than the National Broadband Network because there's no Premier who better understands the potential of superfast broadband for his state.
Friends, we are living in a time of rapid economic change with many businesses and industries going through difficult transitions. At the same time, we see new opportunities emerging.
Superfast broadband is key to so many of those future opportunities. It's the single most important infrastructure investment we can make in the future of Tasmania. It's got the potential to transform the state's economy.
Friends, we're building a National Broadband Network across Australia - but it's all started here in Tasmania. We know that for too long this state was left behind. Rather than an information superhighway, for many Tasmanians it's been a goat track. Tasmania has had the lowest proportion of households with broadband of any state or territory.
But that's not the only reason why we started the NBN here in Tasmania.
Tasmania is the pioneer state for the National Broadband Network and that's because of the vision of Premier David Bartlett.
When we went out to the market to see who could build a national broadband network, none of the proposals offered value for money, but the Tasmanian Government made the best submission.
It became the starting point for what is now the Tasmanian National Broadband Network, TNBN Co, and it's the vision of Premier Bartlett that has put this project in the fast lane in Tasmania.
Within months of our National Broadband Network announcement, we laid the first optical-fibre broadband cable in the project in July last year. We announced the first sites that would receive superfast broadband services by July this year - Smithton, Scottsdale and Midway Point. 
Last October we announced Stage 2 - another seven communities that would receive services and plans for the backbone links in the East Coast, south of Hobart and to the new industrial hub being developed at Westbury.
And just last week, we announced Stage 3 - another 90,000 homes and businesses  -  40,000 in Hobart, 30,000 in Launceston and 10,000 in each of Burnie and Devonport - as well as a $100 million equity injection into TNBN Co.
And we've set a goal to connect 200,000 premises over the next 5 years.
Friends, fast broadband will mean better jobs and business opportunities for Tasmanians. It will mean higher productivity, lower emissions, better health care and better education and Tasmania is pioneering superfast broadband because of Premier Bartlett's vision and energy for Tasmania.
Friends, broadband is only one example of how we're working together to build a strong Tasmania.
Another example is our response to the economic challenges in the state's northern regions. Last year, the north was particularly affected by business closures in the food processing and paper sectors.
I received strong representations from Premier Bartlett - alongside Sid Sidebottom, Jodie Campbell and Dick Adams. That's why we teamed up with David to create a $20 million package to respond to support new ventures to generate new jobs and businesses in the north.
The North West and Northern Tasmania Innovation and Investment Fund invited applications for funds - and it's received 126 applications, which are now under review.
In the meantime, we've already supported 53 small and medium size businesses to become stronger, more competitive businesses through the Enterprise Connect Manufacturing Centre in Burnie.
Friends, David Bartlett is a bloke who understands Tasmanian families. A bloke who rolls his sleeves up and works hard for the people of this state. A bloke who cares deeply for his kids, his community and his state.
He's got a vision for a stronger Tasmania. He's got the right priorities for Tasmanian families.
And as Prime Minister, I look forward to working with him to deliver for Tasmania's future.
I'm delighted to introduce to you the Premier of Tasmania, David Bartlett.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
The Australian Government values the role of the Australian Medical Association in representing the interests of Australian doctors - in general practice and other specialties, medical students and doctors in training. We especially value the AMA's constructive engagement in the national debate on the future of our health and hospitals system.
In particular, tonight I want to acknowledge the hard work of Andrew Pesce as President of the AMA. I've appreciated Andrew's input and his engagement with the health reform agenda in the meetings that we have had together in recent weeks.
The Government and the AMA are both committed to tackling the long-term challenge of health reform, and we are both committed on the direction we need to take to tackle this challenge - in particular, on the need for stronger clinician leadership within our health system.
In July last year, the AMA told us about the sorts of things that they would like to see in health reform. In a speech to the National Press Club, Andrew said, and I quote:
"Services must be organised and administered as close as possible to the actual delivery of the service (to the bedside)."
He also said:
"Reform must enable more decision-making by health professionals at the local and institutional levels."
"Reform must encourage a move to national standards."
Andrew, we heard you.
What I am going to talk about tonight is what the National Health and Hospitals Network means to you, how you have helped shape this reform and the critical role that you have to play in the future.
In framing this reform, the Government conducted more than 100 consultations with clinicians, health professionals and patients across the country, from major tertiary hospitals through to small primary care centres providing the entire clinical support for several towns.
I have heard firsthand about:
     * the need to provide clinicians with leadership and flexibility to determine what works best for their patients;
     * the need to recognise that general practitioners are the backbone of our health system - and to properly support and train them;
     * the need to train more doctors and to ensure that our next generation of doctors are equipped with a world class education;
     * the shortage of health professionals in our rural and remote communities and the demands placed on our dedicated rural doctors, who are often the single practitioner servicing the full spectrum of needs of several small communities;
     * the future information technology needs to support our health system;
     * the major differences in quality and standards across the nation; and
     * the need to support training and research in both our hospitals and in health services in the community.
Again, we have heard you, and as a Government, we are determined to act, after so many years when health reform was considered just too hard to undertake.
The Australian Government believes that now is the time for action on health and hospitals. The health system we have today - though it has served us well - has come to a tipping point.
The current system is fragmented.
Its structure encourages cost shifting and blame shifting between different levels of government.
It wastes resources.
It leaves too many patients waiting at the end of long queues.
It is increasingly unable to cope with the strains under which it operates.
It often leaves key decisions in the hands of bureaucrats far too remote from the communities that health professionals serve.
And it is unprepared for the challenges of the future - an ageing population, rising chronic disease rates, workforce shortages and the rising cost of medical care.
The scale of the challenge is reflected in Treasury's conclusion that without action, State government budgets by 2045-46 will be completely overwhelmed, with health spending consuming their entire revenue.
In other words, as a nation we cannot afford to delay action any longer.
Within our first year in office, we signed a National Health Care Agreement that delivered $64 billion - a 50% increase in on the previous agreement, and last week we announced the most significant reforms to health and hospitals since the introduction of Medicare.
The National Health and Hospitals Network will be nationally funded and locally run.
The Australian Government will become the dominant funder of our public hospital system.
We will devolve responsibility for managing our public hospitals to Local Hospital Networks.
We will take over all funding and policy responsibility for GP and Primary Health Care services.
But we know that much more is needed - and we will have more to say over the coming weeks and months ahead.
We will be addressing the reform of primary care in greater detail because if we are to take pressure off our hospital system, that is going to happen through providing better primary care in the community.
General Practitioners will be very important to those changes.
We will also tackle the long-term shortage of doctors, nurses and allied health professionals, building on the record $1.1 billion investment in training more health professionals and the expansion of GP training places that are already being delivered.
We will take the National Health and Hospitals Network to the States at next month's meeting of the Council of Australian Governments and if the States and Territories do not sign up to fundamental reform, we will take this reform plan to the people at the next election - to give the Australian Government all the power it needs to reform the health system.
What I want to talk about with you tonight is what these reforms mean for you as doctors.
First, what a nationally funded network means for you.
Second, what national standards mean for you.
And third, what Local Hospital Networks and clinical leadership mean for you.
Under our plan, for the first time, the Australian Government will permanently fund 60 per cent of the efficient price of all public hospital services. It will also shoulder the burden of rising hospitals costs into the future.
As the dominant funder of the hospital system, the Government will pay for hospital services differently. Instead of providing States with a blank cheque, the Government will pay hospitals directly for each service they provide.
It has not only been patients who have been short changed by jurisdictional buck-passing and system-wide inefficiencies. It has been medicos who have been left to turn patients away from hospital wards due to a lack of available beds. It has been doctors who have had to work in often rundown buildings, without state-of-the-art equipment, as the number of administrative and clerical staff has ballooned to more than 36,000.
Under a National Health and Hospitals Network, things will change - from service provision to the delivery of operating capital and large scale capital works, hospitals will be better resourced into the future.
The level of government with the strongest financial position will foot a dominant share of all hospital costs and it will do so on a permanent basis.
For the first time, we will provide clinicians with the certainty of knowing that when you admit a patient, the hospital is being paid a fair price for the services that you directly deliver. This fair price will be set by an independent national umpire. The umpire will be free from the clutches of either level of Government.
This means no more finger-pointing between governments about the rate of indexation for hospital funding and it means no more arbitrary cuts to the indexation rate - which undermine funding for public hospital services.
Instead, funding will reflect an independent assessment that takes into account clinical advice about what is needed to deliver services properly and efficiently. And, in line with the AMA's recommendations, the efficient price will reflect the varying cost of service delivery across different hospitals in rural and remote locations, and for patients with more complicated conditions.
As the majority funder of the health and hospitals system, the Australian Government will require strong national standards and transparent reporting in the health system. These national standards will reflect the high expectations that patients and clinicians should rightly have of health and hospital services. These national standards will apply across the health system, including:
     * Access to hospital care;
     * Access to GPs and other local health professionals;
     * Safety and quality in the health system; and
     * Financial performance.
Today, there is significant variation in waiting times for emergency departments and elective surgery across our eight state and territory health systems.
Last week I said that a national network would for the first time mean tough national standards. For the first time, patients - no matter which hospital they attend, no matter where it is - will know that their hospital is subject to the same strict standards as every other hospital.
This week, I can announce that we will put money on the line to drive those standards.
We must improve waiting times for emergency services. We must improve waiting times for elective surgery.
But consistent with the move to activity-based funding, we won't be handing over blank cheques.
Today I can reveal that we will make additional investments, based on reaching and exceeding those tough national standards. In other words - performance incentives for local hospitals.
This will not be the whole of our extra investments - not by a long shot - but we believe it is crucial to recognise concrete improvements in a concrete way.
This will give local hospitals more funds to deliver essential health services, and drive innovation and improvements across our hospitals.
National standards will also drive better health and hospital outcomes, but to achieve better outcomes, the pursuit of these standards needs to be informed by clinical practice, and that's where clinicians will play a critical role.
The national standards are our destination. It is clinicians, and their expertise, that will provide us with the quickest and surest route of reaching these standards.
Part of reaching the destination is ensuring clinicians have sufficient scope and authority to adapt best practices at the local level. I will return this important matter shortly.
But an equally important part is ensuring that clinicians have sufficient voice to tell decision makers what national best practices are.
The Government will support clinicians in ensuring we have ways of disseminating their experience and their research, and putting it into practice nationally. We will do so by supporting the development of national clinical guidelines, and we will do so by enhancing the role of the Australian Commission on Safety and Quality in Health Care, to expand its range of functions to drive evidence based medicine.
And we will underpin our commitment with a new role as the dominant funder of teaching and research in our public hospitals.
Local Hospital Networks are another key element of our reform agenda. As I have made clear, these are not the hospital boards of old, which pitted hospitals against each other in a fight for funding.
Networks will be made up of small groups of public hospitals which will work together to deliver patient care, manage their budgets and answer for their performance.
I know how important this is for clinicians. Across the nation, clinicians tell me they feel locked out of decisions on the delivery of health services in their communities. Everyone in this room knows this damages staff morale, increases turnover and disrupts patient care.
Under our reforms, Local Hospital Networks will have Governing Councils made up of clinicians, and finance and management professionals, who are in touch with local needs. These Governing Councils will work with local clinicians to ensure their expertise - especially on quality and safety - is incorporated in the day to day operation of hospitals.
I know many of you in this room will be members of the various forms of clinical advisory councils that exist today, and I suspect that the same number of you will be frustrated at the constant talk and lack of action arising from these bodies that you devote your precious time and energy to.
Our reform plan will bring a fundamental change to the relationship between clinicians and the CEO of the local hospital. The strings will no longer be pulled by unseen bureaucrats.
Imagine the situation I outlined last week where two clinicians at a regional hospital pioneered the development of new services for elderly patients which decreased their admission rate and provided them with better care in the community.
Instead of spending time putting together business cases that end up in the bottom drawer of a bureaucrat hundreds of miles away, the clinicians will be able to deal directly with the Governing Council, and the Governing Council will have the authority to act.
Let me be clear - clinical leadership will be an integral part of Local Hospital Networks and will be built in at every layer across the National Health and Hospital Network.
The Australian Government will establish Lead Clinician Groups so doctors - who know patients best - will be able to improve service planning and the allocation of clinical services in their area.
Lead Clinician Groups will also be drawn upon to provide solutions to national clinical standards.
These groups will complement the corporate governance of Local Hospital networks - giving local clinicians a voice.
We will make sure that clinicians and representative bodies like the AMA are involved in the development and implementation of lead clinicians groups across the Network.
Reforming the Australian health system will be tough, but if we get the structural reforms in place now, we can build a health network that is sustainable, and fair and efficient; one able to navigate the challenges that lie ahead; and one that reflects the excellence of the medical professionals who serve the needs of patients in Australia every day.
We value the AMA's partnership and valuable contribution to building better health and better hospitals for all Australians.
I thank you.


Eamon said a couple of weeks ago that there's no place for politics at a dinner like this.
And of course he's right.
But in my experience, packing 500 people of Irish extraction into a dining hall like this and offering to quench their thirst with a glass or seven of Guinness is the first step towards fomenting political insurrection.
Politics and the Irish go together like leprechauns and rainbows.
So in a warm spirit of non-partisan Irish hospitality, let me welcome my political opponent Tony Abbott to Queensland.
This time last year, I mentioned my namesake, St Kevin of Glendalough who lived in 6th century Ireland.
For those of you who aren't familiar with the works of this great saint, I can let you in on a little secret.
St Kevin was in fact an abbott.
He wasn't a mad abbott.
He was a run-of-the-mill abbott, given to long boring sermons and moral crusades against the lasciviously short loin cloths of the sixth century.
St Kevin in fact lived in a cave as a hermit for seven years - nothing compared to my ten long years in opposition.
His one great virtue was that he was attributed with many extravagant miracles - including steering his monastery through the global financial crisis of 578 AD.
He also held back wave after wave of unauthorised people movements of the latter 6th century, otherwise known as the Anglo-Saxons and Jutes.
St Anthony, on the other hand, was not Irish.
He was born in Portugal, lived in Italy and preached throughout Europe.
He was a seriously multicultural 13th century type.
St Anthony was trained as an Augustinian.
Be careful, Tony - Martin Luther also began life as an Augustinian.
In fact St Anthony was a man of shifting allegiances - later becoming a Franciscan.
St Anthony is now best known as the patron saint of lost things.
To be theologically correct, lost things probably doesn't extend to lost causes.
For that we must turn to St Jude.
And to be equally correct, St Anthony was canonised in record time - a mere 12 months after his passing, a testament to his virtue.
St Kevin on the other hand had to wait 1300 years.
Whether that says something about their namesakes in 21st century Australian politics, I'll leave you to judge.
But I digress.
One year ago, when I spoke to this gathering, I mentioned my Irish grandmother.
Hannah Cashin was born on the Tweed River in 1892.
She was the daughter of Irish parents who had migrated from the small parish of Ballingarry in County Tipperary.
I confessed to a few family secrets.
Like my family's links to the Young Irelander Rebellion of 1848 - having come from the town where the national tricolour of green, white and orange was first unfurled.
And I owned up to my family's involvement in a long-running factional fight that raged across Tipperary in the 19th century, between the Shanavests and the Caravets.
There's even a whisper that Hannah Cashin's grandfather may have been the same William Cashin killed by the blow of a stone to his forehead in the great factional fight of 1838.
Which is probably why my forebears felt at home in the Australian Labor Party after they arrived on these shores.
But now that I've come clean about my own past - there's a matter of history that Tony needs to clear up.
No, I'm not asking Tony to discuss his views, as an ardent monarchist, on the actions of the British Crown against a nascent Irish republican movement.
I'm referring to a historic document that I have with me on the podium tonight.
It lists the names of the men and women transported to Australia on the Second Fleet in 1790.
It inscribes the name of my paternal forebear Thomas Rudd - from the thieving English side of my ancestry, as opposed to the revolutionary Irish side.
Thomas nicked a pair of shoes and got seven years in Australia.
He served his time.
He then returned to England - only to reoffend in 1799, and get transported to Australia for a second time, and for another seven years.
Getting transported to Australia twice for thieving reflected a prodigious talent.
And a worthy professional preparation for politics.
But I digress.
The question raised by this Second Fleet passenger list concerns another passenger.
On the same vessel to Australia that transported Thomas Rudd was another passenger by the name of:
William ABBOTT - from Norfolk
The question I have is, does Billy Abbott bear any ancestral relationship to Tony Abbott?
And what was his offence?
And did the forebears of Rudd and Abbott ever cross each other on the high seas - burdening future generations of Rudds and Abbotts with a score to be settled that would finally be fought out on the national stage more than two centuries later?
But as Eamon has said, a Queensland Irish Association event like tonight's is no time for politics.
Especially not in an election year.
So I won't be making any policy announcements tonight.
Although, this being an election year I asked my department to provide the Cabinet with some options for boosting St Patrick's Day celebrations.
They came up with three.
Option one - making the new national anthem It's A Long Way to Tipperary.
Option two - replacing the AFL, and rugby league and rugby union with Gaelic Football as the national football code.
Option three - my personal preference - opening up the Lodge to all Irish Australians for St Patrick's Day, with an open bar and Guinness on tap.
And so it shall be if we see the re-election of the Rudd Government.
A few comments of a more serious nature.
As we know, Ireland isn't exactly the world's largest nation.
But it's hard to think of a national day celebrated with such spirit and enthusiasm anywhere in the world.
And two million of our 22 million Australians claim Irish ancestry.
This reflects the vast reach of the Irish diaspora.
And the enduring power of Irish culture and identity.
But that's Ireland - small nation, with big hearts and a grand character.
The course of our nation's history was profoundly influenced by Irish migrants and their progeny - the Ned Kellys, James Scullins, Ben Chifleys and Paul Keatings.
Including those who, in the words of Chifley, shone their light on a hill.
As well as by less well-known Australians of Irish descent.
Those who we might say, followed the old Irish folk custom of putting a candle in a darkened window, to guide the way of strangers.
People who, one by one, helped build our national character as Australians.
The larrikin humour.
The rebellious character.
The deep suspicion of authority.
The warm hospitality.
What became for us mateship.
And the deep, deep instinct to defend the underdog.
Great Irish traits - traits that we can all celebrate.
That's why I'm delighted to announce a very special celebration.
On St Patrick's Day next year, the National Museum of Australia will open the most comprehensive exhibition ever on the Irish in Australia.
It will celebrate all aspects of the Irish contribution to Australia.
Its time span will extend from the Irish who came on the First Fleet, to the thousands of Irish backpackers who visit Australia every year.
It will be a generous and scholarly exhibition, with hundreds of exhibits from every state in Australia and from Ireland and the United States.
Many of those items have never been on display before.
The National Museum tells me that no country has ever had an exhibition on this scale, celebrating the contribution of the Irish diaspora.
The exhibition should attract interest from all across the world, and I expect it to be seen by tens of thousands of Australians before the National Museum takes the exhibition to Ireland later in 2011.
And in June this year, ahead of next year's exhibition, the National Museum of Australia will be publishing a book to celebrate the stories of Irish Australians - suitably titled Sinners, Saints and Settlers.
Friends, the first occasion when the Queensland Irish Association's St Patrick's Day celebrations were held here in Tara House was 1928.
The Catholic Archbishop of Brisbane, James Duhig, great friend of Labor Premiers T.J. Ryan and Red Ted Theodore - spoke on that occasion of his great pride as an Irish Australian.
His pride in the history, the culture and the values that came with being Australian of Irish descent.
But more than all of that, he spoke of his belief that God had given a diversity of gifts to different peoples throughout the world.
And he spoke of Australia's special opportunity.
"Never in the history of the world", Archbishop Duhig said, had any nation had such a great opportunity for combining these diverse gifts of different cultures.
He spoke of the combination of the Irish, the English, the Welsh, the French, the Germans, Italians and the Danes.
Eighty years and three generations later, Archbishop Duhig's words still ring true.
Ours is a culture today more greatly enriched by the gifts of cultures from every part of the world.
And no nation has a greater opportunity than does Australia, to bring together, in harmony, those different cultures - to build something far greater than the sum of its parts.
Australia is a young nation.
Our future offers extraordinary opportunity.
And no people have made a greater contribution to our history, character and identity than the children of St Patrick.
So on the eve of St Patrick's Day, we celebrate Ireland.
And we celebrate Ireland's contribution to the great nation that we all cherish - Australia.
So tonight I propose a toast - to Australia.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY 
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
Today is an historic occasion. Today we launch the National Compact: Working Together. Today marks a new era of collaboration between the Australian Government and community and not-for-profit organisations - the groups we often refer to as the Third Sector.
This compact sets the framework for all of the Government's work with Third Sector organisations as we tackle some of the greatest challenges facing Australia, an era of collaboration that will fundamentally strengthen and improve the way we work together, that will strengthen civil society and that will help the organisations which help many of the most needy and disadvantaged people in Australia.
Over the past two years, many of you here have been closely involved in bringing the National Compact to fruition, and today marks a great milestone.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank my colleagues Jenny Macklin and in particular Ursula Stephens for their substantial work in making this initiative a reality. With this National Compact, we now have a framework for ongoing dialogue and consultation that will enrich policy and program development and service delivery, and today both the Government and leaders in the Third Sector will publicly sign up to it.
When we talk about the Third Sector, we are talking about 5.4 million volunteers - who tirelessly give more to society than they ever hope to receive. These not-for-profit community groups work in areas as diverse as health and social welfare, mental health, homelessness, heritage, the arts, the environment, sport, employment, volunteering and advocacy.
As the Productivity Commission noted recently, there are more than 600,000 such organisations - large and small. They contribute $43 billion a year to our economy, and provide 8 per cent of employment in our economy - almost 1 million jobs.
Of these organisations, some 440,000 are small unincorporated organisations that operate at the local community level, without Government funding or even employed staff, but with great purpose.
Volunteer sports groups, local gardening groups, seniors companion programs and thousands of other volunteer organisations - all making a huge contribution.
Together, all these organisations form the foundations that underpin our civil society, and this National Compact is long overdue recognition of that role.
The interests and responsibilities of Third Sector organisations are diverse, but they are united by a shared commitment to community wellbeing without individual commercial gain - and Government and the Sector need each other.
Government needs the deep reach of Third Sector organisations to be able to connect with people at the grassroots, and in turn, Third Sector organisations need the support that Government can provide to sustain their work.
In just over two years in office, we have acted to provide this greater support, and provide it without strings. One of our first actions, in early 2008, was to remove from Government contracts the gag clauses introduced by the Howard Government.
Those clauses banned community organisations with government contracts from speaking out on important matters of public policy. They muzzled basic freedom of speech, they undermined accountability of government policy, and they stopped community organisations from doing their job - to be a voice for the voiceless and those on the margins of our society.
We opposed those clauses in opposition. We abolished them in government and under a Government that I lead, they will never, ever return. We also acted quickly to reverse the previous Government's changes to the treatment of Fringe Benefits Tax for family tax benefit and child care benefit purposes, so that workers in the community sector did not have their benefits taken away.
We have developed a national not-for-profit Standard Chart of Accounts to reduce red tape and compliance costs for our funded agencies, for implementation from July this year. We are also working with the sector to address economic and social challenges through our Community Response Taskforce.
This Taskforce has been critical to our response to the Global Financial Crisis, including:
     * Doubling funding for emergency relief;
     * Investing $5.6 billion in new social housing; and
     * Investing $650 million directly into our communities through the Jobs Fund to create jobs and support local infrastructure projects.
We are supporting not-for-profit ventures in the child care sector by providing a $15 million loan to the consortium GoodStart to purchase 678 former ABC Learning Centres. We are providing $11 million in Temporary Financial Assistance grants to non-profit organisations to ensure the delivery of valuable community services through the economic downturn, and we are supporting volunteers across Australia through Volunteer Grants, including $21 million of grants in 2010, and through the National Volunteering Strategy we are currently developing with the States and Territories.
Our next step is The National Compact: Working Together. The name says it all.
This Compact gives community organisations, large and small, real input into Government policy and program delivery. It enables true collaboration on key social, economic and environmental challenges facing our communities and it allows the broad range of Australian not-for-profit groups to work with Government to achieve a shared vision.
I'd like to take this opportunity to thank all those who contributed to the development of the National Compact through consultations over the past two years, and always, everywhere, there has been immense and valuable contribution from the community sector.
Debate has been incisive, informed and frank. We expected a level of debate, but the overwhelming message was one of support for a Compact.
As one forum participant from Perth said, and I quote: "The moment is here, let's go for it" - and that is what we are doing.
We are all agreed that change is needed in both the Government and the Sector. Government needs to minimise the red tape and layers of reporting that can challenge even the largest and most sophisticated organisations , and there is room to improve the Sector's delivery of services, viability and development of better policy and programs.
The Australian public needs to be assured that there is transparency, accountability, efficiency and value for money in the services being delivered.
The clear message from the Sector was that it wanted a Compact that was succinct, high-level and aspirational.
The National Compact: Working Together is structured around shared principles including:
     * recognising the value of the Sector's work and the importance to national life of a strong, independent and diverse sector;
     * authentic consultation, constructive advocacy and genuine collaboration;
     * a commitment to enduring engagement with marginalised and disadvantaged Australians, especially Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people; and
     * a concerted effort to develop an innovative, appropriately resourced and sustainable Third Sector.
And, in line with these principles, we have identified eight priority areas of action.
     * First, to promote the value and contribution of the Sector.
     * Second, to protect the Sector's right to advocacy -irrespective of any funding relationship that might exist.
     * Third, to recognise the Sector's diversity when consulting and developing sector initiatives.
     * Fourth, to improve information sharing including greater access to publicly funded research and data.
     * Fifth, to reduce red tape and streamline reporting.
     * Sixth, to simplify and improve financial arrangements, not least the inconsistencies across state and federal jurisdictions.
     * Seventh, to improve paid and unpaid workforce challenges.
     * And eighth, to improve funding and procurement processes.
Our next step is to work together on action plans for community sector organisations to raise specific concerns with the Government, consistent with the National Compact.
This Compact will only be given life through the development of those action plans. We are also carefully and seriously considering the Productivity Commission Report into the Not for Profit Sector, which proposes a substantive reform agenda.
Our primary goal is to remove the barriers and obstacles to your work - to let you get on with the job in our communities.
If we are to truly succeed, we need active leadership, engagement and involvement from both the Government and the Third Sector. To do this, we have established the National Compact Sector Advisory Group, and it is good to see many members of the Advisory Group here today, and I thank them for their work.
We will also provide a range of mechanisms for Sector organisations to sign up to the Compact -  all voluntary, of course - and we plan to set up a public register of Compact signatories.
I encourage you all to pick up a copy of the Compact and visit the new National Compact website.
Challenges such as homelessness, Closing the Gap on Indigenous disadvantage, climate change and child protection are major long-term challenges. No government can solve those problems on their own.
They require strong, respectful relationships with individuals, organisations and communities, because only by working together - bringing together all of our resources, experience, skills and creativity - can we build a stronger and fairer Australia.
The Government believes that the National Compact is a commitment to change: change that will see the erosion of the disadvantage that still exists in our prosperous country; change that will create a society where everyone has the opportunity to reach their full potential, and where everyone reaps the benefits of a strong economy.
This Compact sets benchmarks for an active partnership between Government and the Third Sector - a true partnership, where those who advocate on the part of the vulnerable and the dispossessed are not silenced and gagged, but where their opinions are heard and respected and they can make an even greater contribution to building Australia's future.
This is our National Compact.
I thank you.



I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
Tonight is much more than the launch of the GenOne ad campaign.
Tonight is a snapshot of the changing times in our country.
We all have reason to have great belief and hope in what lies ahead for Indigenous Australians and indeed our nation as a whole.
Belief in the growing desire of all Australians to bring about overdue and crucial change.
And hope that our generation is witnessing the Closing of the Gap.
Eddie mentioned the Apology.
We know the Apology was not the end of the healing process.
It was only the beginning.
It was not about the Prime Minister of a country standing up and making a statement.
It was about the evolving cultural DNA of a nation finding its voice.
It started the building of momentum in our society - momentum which we must now maintain and even accelerate.
We must build on the growing recognition that Indigenous business is everyone's business.
Since the Apology, we have seen a renewed focus on creating opportunities for Indigenous people in this country.
Almost 12 months ago, the Australian Government officially endorsed the landmark United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples.
Jenny Macklin said at the time that this was a step forward in "re-setting" the relationship between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.
And this year we have committed our support for the establishment of the National Congress of Australia's First Peoples.
We have reason to be optimistic about where we are headed and I'll tell you why.
We are only three months into 2010 but we have already seen a number of events centered on building a new era in Indigenous engagement and opportunity.
The first was the inaugural rugby league match on the Gold Coast between the NRL All Stars team and the NRL Indigenous All Stars team in February.
Twiggy was there. And I'm sure he will join me in saying that it was a magnificent game, won by the Indigenous All Stars.
And it was a win off the field as well as on.
A couple of weeks later, we had the Indigenous Business Leaders' Forum in Parliament House.
The forum was all about how we can change attitudes and how business can get a better understanding of how to attract and, importantly, retain indigenous workers.
The response was overwhelming.
The room wasn't big enough for everyone who wanted to come.
We had to turn away 150 business leaders - such was the enthusiasm to get involved.
And that provided great encouragement for our new Government Ambassador for Business Action, Colin Carter, who will be working closely with Twiggy and others.
Colin has already visited corporate leaders across the country with the objective of bridging the gap between government and the private sector as we work towards the shared goal of growing Indigenous business.
Just a few days after the Business Leaders' Forum, I attended the opening of the National Centre of Indigenous Excellence here in Sydney.
If you haven't been over to have a look around at what I believe will be the launchpad for many great Indigenous leaders, I thoroughly recommend you go and visit Jason Glanville and his team.
The Indigenous Land Corporation has built a world-class education facility in Redfern that offers great practical help for young Indigenous Australians to reach their potential.
More importantly, it offers a place that allows them to envision new futures - like the futures that Jack and Tania have carved for themselves through hard work and the grasping of opportunities.
All these initiatives sent strong messages to our nation about what can be achieved by Indigenous Australians in the educational, sporting and business spheres.
And tonight we have GenerationOne.
A campaign which, as Twiggy has said, is all about taking responsibility, and changing hearts and minds.
The GenerationOne campaign will reach across our continent and across all sectors of our society.
It will send a strong message back to Indigenous Australians - that we want to create an Australia that values their achievements.
A nation that creates opportunities for those achievements to find purpose.
A nation that appreciates - equally - the hopes and aspirations of Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.
I applaud the private sector for the GenOne initiative - in particular Andrew and Nicola Forrest, James Packer, Kerry Stokes and Lindsay Fox for their funding of the national campaign.
Of course, Twiggy was the brains behind The Australian Employment Covenant (AEC), which aims to secure 50,000 sustainable jobs for Indigenous Australians.
The AEC is about the Australian Government, employers and Indigenous people working together in partnership to provide Indigenous Australians - who are ready to turn their dreams into reality - the opportunity to do so.
But GenerationOne is taking the message a step further -- it's about getting out into the national conscience.
It is not enough to just get corporate Australia on board.
GenerationOne is about engaging all Australians to effect change.
And change will only come when we all change the way we think and act every single day of our lives.
Only then can we relegate the divide between non Indigenous and Indigenous Australians to history.
This launch is a step in the right direction.
As a Government we have always been upfront about calling for partners across the community in strengthening our work to Close the Gap.
Disadvantage is hard to reconcile in such a prosperous nation as ours.
The Australian identity is defined by the concept of the 'fair go'.
There are too many Indigenous Australians who don't get a fair go.
Too many who battle prejudice or lack of understanding and lack the basic opportunities of education and training.
The GenerationOne campaign is about rectifying that.
Just as government cannot tackle this problem alone, nor can pure philanthropic endeavour.
The bottom line is we're all Australians, and we are all in this together.
As I said at the outset, there is a cultural shift underway in Australia.
A shift in perceptions and a belief in the reality that Indigenous Australians deserve the same opportunities as non Indigenous Australians.
This campaign will help harness these changing attitudes.
Because in this campaign all Australians can participate, regardless of their political views and background. 
If you are already active you can do more.
If you have never participated in a movement, you can make a start now and play a simple role to create real change.
I applaud the captains of industry throughout our nation who are passionate about effecting change.
I wish Generation One every success in inspiring that passion in others.


Congratulations to the Royal Australasian College of Physicians for organising this prestigious World Congress here in Melbourne.
I want to begin by recognising the absolute importance of the medical profession to this country's future. We have one of the finest medical professions in the world, albeit a profession currently under great pressure. When we look across out nation and recognise how well we are served by our doctors, by our nurses, by our specialists, indeed this is a good country to be in, but it is a profession under great challenge.
It is also a profession where Australian families are so critically dependant. Every year, almost 87% of Australians see a doctor, with over 286 million services provided. This includes 111 million GP attendances and 22.7 million specialist attendances. This means our medical profession in busy indeed. The challenge we all face is to make sure that this profession in appropriately supported for the future.
But what I'd say, personally, to each one of you who represents a profession from both at home and abroad is how much we, in the Australian Government, appreciate your professional expertise. There's nothing more fundamental than a properly functioning health and hospital system and within it a medical profession whose standing in the community remains high and a profession in which the community places legitimate and continuing trust.
Can I also say, when it comes to physicians themselves, I also have some appreciation of the role that you play within hospitals. Yes, I've watched most of the editions of ER. I do know that surgeons play a critical of the role within hospitals. I also understand that physicians have a role to play as well, which is, some would say, equally if not more critical.
I'm a Prime Minister with extensive medical experience myself - I've worked for nine months as a wardsman at the Canterbury hospital in Sydney. You laugh - can I tell you that on those occasions I remember being told what to do much more by physicians than by surgeons and can I just tell you also I'm sure I deserved it as well.
For those of you who've come from abroad, welcome to Australia and welcome to this great and truly international city of Melbourne. You are welcome guests in this city. You are welcome guests in this country. I'm not a native of this city, so I say it with complete Australian objectivity - this is a truly wonderful city and my only caution or advice to you of those of you who have come from abroad who are choosing to drive while you're here in Melbourne: if you see a sign which says you can turn right by veering left, I suggest to you take appropriate council from one of the locals, pause briefly and pray.
As you will be aware from developments over the last several days, including in the last few hours, health debate and health reform debate is critical right across the world, most particularly, at present, in the United States. Like America, Australia is engaging in a crucially important debate on the future of our health and hospitals system.
Ours is a different debate to America's.
For almost three decades Australia has already benefited from a universal health care system. The establishment of Medicare is one of the proudest achievements of the Australian Government of the 1980s, and it has provided high-quality health care for the Australian people, but 30years later, our health and hospitals system is again under pressure and facing new pressures.
Only a few months after coming to office two years ago, the Government commissioned the most comprehensive review of our health system in 20 years. That report prepared by Dr Christine Bennett and members of the National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission concluded that the health and hospitals system would not be able to cope with the escalating challenges in the future. These challenges include:
     * the ageing of our population;
     * the explosion in chronic diseases;
     * the proper planning for our medical workforce;
     * the cost of medical research and its clinical and pharmaceutical application; and
     * consistent with challenges facing policy makers right across the world, how do you go about funding the system sustainably into the future?
As our health reform Commission said, in its report, the Australian system is at tipping point. For the system to be truly sustainable and to provide first -class health care for all Australians into the future it a system which must be reformed. That is why the Australian Government has committed to the most sweeping reforms to our health and hospitals system since the introduction of Medicare.
These reforms are ambitious. These reforms are long overdue. The time for incremental change has long past.
We propose a new National Health and Hospital Network that is funded nationally and is run locally.
For the first time in the history of our country, the Australian Government will take on the dominant funding responsibility for the entire public hospital system.
For the first time the Australian Government will taken on the dominant funding role for all hospital services including their recurrent needs, their capital needs, their equipment needs, their teaching needs and their training needs.
We would take on the responsibility for the full funding and policy responsibility for GP and health care services.
We would set national standards and require transparent reporting for the health and hospital system nationally.
We would devolve responsibility for public hospital management to Local Hospital Networks - run by clinical management, as well as financial professionals and health management professionals.
We would pay Local Hospital Networks directly for the services they provide through nationally consistent activity based funding, and to fund the above, we would dedicate around one third of the Goods and Services Tax, the Australian consumption tax, to provide a sustainable funding base for the health and hospital system for the long-term future.
Reform now may be fine - ensuring that it is financially sustainable in the long-term is equally critical. As I said before, the time for incremental reform has long passed.
The Australian Government's decision to take on the dominant funding role for the entire hospital system is also designed to deal with waste and duplication and overlap between those between the two levels of government. This can be done by properly integrating the various arms of health care, from preventative care, through primary care, through hospital acute base care, to post-acute care, to aged care. This is a better outcome, therefore, in terms of coordinated care for patients but also a better use of the taxpayers' dollar as well.
We believe these reforms are necessary for the future. However, for these reforms to have effect they must also deal with the challenges that face our medical workforce.
For too long the future needs of our medical workforce have not been properly planned. The time for change has well and truly come.
Last week, I announced a $632 million investment in training additional medical specialists - more than 6,000 more doctors over the next decade ahead.
The Government inherited a situation where 6 in 10 Australians lived in an area where there were shortages of available doctors.
According to the Health Department, just to maintain current levels of services as far as GP and primary care services are concerned, it is estimated that an additional 3,000 GPs will be needed by 2020.
In addition, the Australian Health Workforce Advisory Committee and medical colleges indicate that there will be a shortage of around 1,280 specialists over the course of the next decade as well.
Rightly, there's been much focus on GPs, as we know that they are the frontline of care. The package that the Government has announced will double the number of places available for medical graduates to train to become GPs from 600 when the Government took office to 1,200, starting with an increase of 900 for the years immediately ahead.
Importantly for physicians, we are also doubling the current number of places available for medical graduates who undertake training to become specialist doctors and providing that in private, community and rural settings, increasing the number from 360 in 2010 up to an annual figure of 900.
Given the nature of a gathering such as this we're not simply talking about an addition to the number of specialist training places beyond public hospitals. I emphasise again what I said before - for the first time in the country's history, the Australian Government will be taking on the dominant funding role when it comes to the teaching and training functions of our public hospital system as well. We are, therefore, serious to get the workforce planning challenge right.
As I announced three weeks ago, we will be taking our plan to the States and Territory Governments when the Council of Australian Governments meets in April. In recent days I have been having discussions with the various State Premiers and Chief Ministers, and Nicola Roxon with the Health Ministers of Australia in the States and Territories. Our message to them has been very simple: work with us, work with the medical profession - who want reform, work with the nursing profession - who want reform, and let's get this reform done.
In partnership, we can deliver better health and better hospital services for working families right across Australia, but if the states and territories choose not to sign up, then we will seek a further mandate from the Australian people by or at the next election in order to give the Commonwealth the powers necessary to implement these reforms.
As many of you will be aware, tomorrow I will be debating the future of our health and hospital system with the Leader of the Opposition. This is an important debate.
I welcome the opportunity of putting the Government's record in its two years in office and its plans for the future on the table and to do the same with the Leader of the Opposition - his record, 12 years in office, 5 years as Health Minister and his plans for the future as well.
In fact, my opponent, Mr Abbott, was one of Australia's longest serving Health Ministers - in fact, as Health Minister for twice as long as the current Government has been in office.
I welcome giving Australians the opportunity to scrutinise not just our respective records on health and hospitals, but also our plans for the future as well.
The entry point for a debate such as this is to have a fully costed, fully funded policy for the future - a fully costed, fully funded health and hospitals policy for the future.
The Government is clear and I look forward to debating, very much, my political opponent's fully funded and fully costed policy as well.
In politics, as in any other walk of life, it is easy to criticise everything and to propose nothing and that goes for the health and hospital policy debate as well.
Given the centrality of health and hospitals for the future, this will be a dominant debate between now and the next election, and so it should be and I look forward to the opportunity, at any place, at any time, to debating the future of our health and hospital system, because this is such a central debate for our country's future.
Because of entrenched opposition, both at the federal political level and in some cases at the state bureaucratic level, the Australian Government's proposal for a National Health and Hospitals Network is likely to encounter considerable resistance.
Nonetheless, the Government will not be deterred, because Australia can no longer tolerate delay on these urgent reforms.
The Government has been encouraged by the level of support it has received from the profession and from the community.
Of course, there's a wide range of views on the details of the reforms. That will be the case with an area as complex as the health system, but the overwhelming message that we're hearing from experts, from business and from those on the front line of health care is that this is a good plan and let's just get on with it.
The President of the AMA has said that the policy is a credible response to the problems and deficiencies in the public hospital system and is evidence that there has been considerable consultation with patients and doctors. The Federal Secretary of the Australian Nursing Federation, Ged Kearney, has said much the same.
The Australian Health and Hospitals Association has described our plan, as I quote them, "a workable, well thought out plan for the health system."
The Royal Australasian College of Surgeons has said that:
"An advocate of single source funding for Australian public hospitals, the College believes such a proposal would add transparency to a system which has been too easily manipulated in the past."
These remarks and others like them from professional bodies within the health profession right across the country demonstrate a wide consensus about the need for reform, about the need to end the blame game and the need, simply, to get on with it.
It is time now that as a nation we undertook this fundamental reform.
As I said at the outset, the National Health and Hospitals Network would be funded nationally and run locally, with the Australian Government becoming the dominant funder of the Australian public hospital system for the first time in our history.
As many of you will be aware, the Australian Government undertook health forums in the middle of last year to engage with clinicians, patients and the wider community about the future of our health and hospitals system.
There were more than 100 public hospital forums held across the nation, in every State and every Territory. I personally attended 21 of these - at least one, and sometimes more, in each State and each Territory.
One of the clearest messages I've heard was that too many of our local clinical leaders are not adequately involved in decisions about the delivery of health and hospital services in their local communities, where they invariably know best. That is why we will be establishing Local Hospital Networks, to coordinate and plan the delivery of a comprehensive set of services within a recognised community of interest.
The Networks will comprise small groups of hospitals with a geographic or functional connection. Functional often, invariably, with a relevant tertiary hospital, but which are large enough to operate efficiently and provide a range of hospital services within the network itself.
These are not individual local hospital boards.
Alongside the need for greater involvement from local clinicians and local communities in running our hospitals, the overwhelming view of clinicians is that we must deliver health services in a coordinated way.
Where health care is tailored to the patient, there should be proper coordination across primary, across acute and across post-acute settings.
The present system sees too many patients being shunted around between self-contained systems or silos, one controlled by the State, the other by the Federal, or sometimes an ungodly-cocktail of the above. Patients themselves often fall in between the cracks.
The integration of services that will be facilitated by Local Hospital Networks is critical at a time when there is a much greater range of health services being delivered. It is also critical to dealing with the rise of chronic disease where patients have a much more and complex set of needs which they need to rely upon across hospitals, community settings and in their own homes as well.
For patients, there is a widespread sense of exhaustion, of being run around from one health service to another because of the lack of coordination and care within our system.
If we were to return to the days of individual local hospital boards, rather than integrated local hospital networks we would have a recipe for even greater fragmentation of our health and hospitals system: hospitals fighting against each other for resources; patients with more complex needs getting second-rate care and not getting the full range of services they need.
At the other extreme, there are proponents of very large health areas and health regions which are often too remote from local needs. Simply put, regional health services are not capable of tailoring services to local needs and often stifle local innovation and flexibility which is capable of improving health services on the ground in local communities.
By contrast, we argue that by establishing local hospital networks we will provide a much greater role for local clinical leadership and respond to local needs while at the same time having sufficient critical mass to deliver a range of services in a properly coordinated manner.
The second key area of the Government's plan is to pay local hospital networks directly for each service they provide rather than simply providing block funding grants to the States.
Under the Government's plan for the national health and hospitals networks, which we have clearly explained in the relevant documentation produced a couple of weeks ago, local hospital networks will be paid a price that reflects appropriate loading for their locality and the complexity of the patients they serve. The price will be determined by an independent umpire and country prices will not be set by city assumptions.
Since as early as March 2008, the Commonwealth and States both agreed to develop activity based funding. We made it clear that we would ensure the viability of small, regional and rural hospital services, and this is what we'll deliver on through the funding model that the Government will employ.
By paying hospitals directly for the services they deliver, we'll no longer be stuck with funding arrangements that are years out of date. Instead, hospital financing will have the flexibility to adjust to changing conditions, such as:
     * changes in population growth;
     * changes in demographics; and
     * changes in the health care costs due to clinical and technological innovation.
It will also enable local clinical leaders to respond with flexible local solutions which fully harness local expertise and experience, rather than mechanically applying a state-wide or even nation-wide template approach to each element of service delivery.
By paying local hospital networks directly, it will also enable local clinical leaders to respond with flexible local solutions which fully harness local expertise and efficiencies.
For the Government's reform plan to succeed, it must be properly funded.
In 1995-1996, the Commonwealth share of public hospital funding was 45 per cent of all Government funding of public hospitals. It remained around this level through to the early 2000s and then began to decline.
In 2002-03 it fell to 43 per cent. Two years later, in 2004-05, it was down to 40 per cent. Two years later, in 2006-07, it was down to 37 per cent.
The First Intergenerational Report was released by the Commonwealth Treasury in 2002. The report said, loud and clear, that to meet the needs of an ageing population health spending must rise, not fall. That is why in the Government's first two years in office, we took immediate action on that, increasing the Australian Government's allocation to the public hospitals run by the States by 50 percent to a record $64 billion dollars. That is why we took early action to increase the number of GP training places by 35 percent. That is why, for the first time, the Government has already begun to invest directly in the capital needs of the hospital system around the country, including here in Melbourne at the new facility at Parkville in which the Australian Government is contribution $426 million, some 50 percent of the capital needs for this integrated cancer care centre which will be one of the best, not just in Australia, but the world.
This is the action we've undertaken in our first two years but looking ahead to the future we must have sustainable funding for the long-term future in order to give effect to these reforms.
Under this Government's policy, the Australian Government will, for the first time, as I noted before, become the dominant funder of the entire system. This 60 percent stake equates to some $11 billion per year from next year.
We will fund 60 per cent of recurrent expenditure on research and training functions undertaken in public hospitals. We'll fund 60 per cent of the capital expenditure - both operating and planned new capital equipment - to maintain and improve public hospital infrastructure.
This commitment by the Australian Government is unprecedented. No previous Australian Government has ever attempted any responsibility for funding hospital infrastructure, let alone taking on the dominant responsibility for hospital infrastructure in the future.
Critically, the Australian Government will shoulder responsibility for the lion's share of future growth in the system as well.
This is important not only to ensure we can deliver better health and hospitals into the future, but also to underwrite the financial sustainability of our federation. We calculate that by taking on this greater funding burden, we will also be assuming $15 billion of additional funding that would otherwise be borne by the States.
Without policy change, under current trends spending on health and hospitals would consume the entire revenue raised by State Governments over the next 20 to 30 years to the exclusion of any spending on any other critical portfolio area, such as education, transport and law and order - such is the rate of increase in health and hospital expenditure that governments are currently facing.
To conclude, I believe that reform of the health and hospital system is one of the greatest long-term challenges facing our country. We must get this right, because it will have an impact on every single Australian at various stages of their lives. Every day, hundreds of thousands of Australians rely on our health and hospital system to provide quality care for themselves and for their families.
I am determined to implement the reforms we need so that Australians can be confident in the quality of the health care that they receive in the future and of the funding that underpins that health care system for the future as well.
We are under no illusions whatsoever as to the magnitude of this task, but the size of the task is no excuse to push it to one side simply because the degree of political difficulty may be great.
The Australian Government wants a working partnership - it wants to work in partnership with the Sate and Territory Governments, with health professional organisations, including the peak bodies such as the Royal Australasian College of Physicians and the wider community.
We cannot put off reform any longer.
You, as leading physicians in the Australian community, are key agents of change. Your voice must be added to this national debate as well. If it is done so, if it is done effectively in partnership with the Australian Government and all other branches of the profession which wish to see fundamental and sustainable reform of our health and hospital system for the future then we will prevail.
The Australian Government is determined to take that action.
I thank you. 


E &amp; OE proof only
Thanks very much, Michael, and thank you all for being here today and welcoming me to this marvellous building. This is the most impressive railway bridge garter I've ever been in anywhere in Australia, so for those of you who work here this is an extraordinary piece of redesign and the use of an old building for new purposes.
I begin by acknowledging the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
Thanks, Michael, for the invitation to address you today on the critical challenges focusing on Australia's future. As you all know, there is no shortage of those challenges.
The critical factor, of course, in responding to each of them is to have a clear-cut strategy dealing with each element.
Standing still has never been an option for Australia. In fact, standing still is the only sure-fire option for falling behind. Policy, if it's to be real, must be dynamic, forward-looking and forward leaning.
The Government is committed to building a strong economy, protecting the jobs of working families and keeping Australia out of recession while most of the rest of the world has gone under: to change the nation for working families; to change the nation for senior Australians; to change the nation for generations of Australians to come.
In our first two years in office, we've begun this work. We've begun by:
- Bringing in fair and balanced laws for the workplace through the abolition of Work Choices; 
- Lifting our investment in and improving the state of our schools through the Education Revolution;
- Delivering better health and hospital services through the biggest reform of the system since Medicare.
On top of this, the Government has also committed to delivering a better future for all Australians: 
- By laying the foundations for long-term, sustainable growth by investing in the drivers of productivity growth in skills, infrastructure and regulatory reform;
- By properly planning and investing in our major cities and in our major regions to deal with the challenges of a growing population; and also
- By acting on the great intergenerational challenges of climate change and water.
The core to all the above is to build a strong economy for the future.
The first two years that the Government has been in office have seen wild swings in global economic conditions - from the inflationary boom of 2007, to the dramatic global bust of 2008-09, and the emerging dawn of a new era of growth following the worst global recession since the Great Depression.
Through these radically changing circumstances, the Government has sought to apply consistent principles of economic management - countercyclical macroeconomic policy to maintain stability while continuing to prosecute a comprehensive program of microeconomic reform.
The Government's economic strategy has therefore been to manage the economy through fluctuating short-term economic conditions while at the same time implementing long-term economic reform. These are the two continuing arms of the Government's economic policy - both for the first two years that we have been in office and for the future.
In my address today I want to remark upon three points: 
- First, to report on how we have implemented this economic strategy through the boom and bust cycle of global economy in the last two years; 
- Second, to identify the emerging challenges associated with a return to growth following the global recession and the Government's response to those challenges;
- Third, to lay out our plans to build a platform for sustainable growth over the long term, including by building more productive, more sustainable and more liveable cities.
When this Government came to office, the Australian economy was in the full blush of an historic mining boom, fuelled by strong global economic growth: 
- Nominal GDP growth was running at 8 per cent. 
- Record commodity prices had driven up our terms of trade up more than 20 per cent since the mid-2000s, the sharpest increases since the wool boom straight after the Second World War.
- BHP Billiton and Rio Tinto were in the process of securing a record 85% increase in iron ore prices and a 200% increase in the coking coal price, delivering record corporate profitability for these mining giants;
- And these historic prices pushed mining's share of Australia's total GDP back to levels not seen since the end of the late 19th Century, when Western Australia was in the midst of a gold rush and Broken Hill was first opened up for development.
But, after 15 years of uninterrupted growth, Australia was in danger of falling into the trap of its own prosperity. The economy was suffering from capacity constraints including widespread infrastructure and skills shortages: 
- First, infrastructure bottlenecks emerged with bulk commodity ships queuing off our ports, urban congestion clogging up major cities and a broadband network that was among the slowest and most expensive in the world;
- Second, employers were suffering chronic labour and skills shortages as they struggled with the tightest labour market in 30 years;
And this combination of a booming economy and constrained economic capacity threatened to undermine Australia's macroeconomic stability. 
- Inflation rose to 16-year highs, peaking at 5 per cent in September 2008 - the highest recorded inflation rate in Australia since inflation targeting was formally introduced in 1996;
- And the Reserve Bank responded by slamming on the monetary policy brakes, delivering 12 consecutive interest rate rises, leaving Australia with the second highest interest rates in the developed world.
In my first speech on economic policy as Prime Minister of Australia, delivered in Perth in January 2008, I committed to tackling these problems, these economic challenges, through the principles of responsible, conservative economic management. In that speech I committed to: "direct all arms of economic policy ... to take the pressure off demand, reduce costs in the economy through regulatory reform, and further boost the supply side capacity of the Australian economy to alleviate inflationary pressures" - and that is what the Government went about doing.
In the following months, the Government's razor gang worked tirelessly to deliver savings of $33 billion over four years in our first budget - more savings than our predecessors delivered in the entire previous term that they were in office.
The forecast 2008-09 budget surplus of $22 billion was the largest surplus as a share of GDP in nearly a decade and achieved by delivering the lowest real increase in government spending in nearly a decade.
Of course, in the last quarter of 2008 global economic conditions changed rapidly and dramatically. On September 15, nine months after the Government came to office, the collapse of Lehman Brothers brought the global economy to the edge of a precipice.
In the months following the Lehmans' collapse, global stock markets fell by more than 50% from peak to trough - a steeper fall than had been experienced in the Great Depression. Credit markets experienced unprecedented dislocation, the global banking system recorded almost 3 trillion dollars in losses, and more than 120 banks failed or were bailed out.
Rapidly, the financial crisis also spread to the real economy:
- Major developed economies fell like dominoes into recession;
- Global trade fell by more than 40 per cent - also the sharpest fall since the Depression;
- And corporate titans, including Ford, General Motors and Citibank teetered on the brink of bankruptcy.
At the time, many commentators were seriously fearful of a return to the 1930s.
The Australian Government knew we would not be immune from these global events. It wasn't a question of whether the global economic storm would hit Australia - it was only a question of how badly we would be hit and what we could do to reduce the damage.
By early October, Australia's economy began to slump, with leading indicators including, retail trade, consumer and business confidence, and stock market indicators collapsing.
But it was not just about statistics - it was about avoiding the very real impact of recession on the lives and aspirations of working families and hard-working small businesses right across the country.
Towards the end of 2008, I received a letter from a shop owner in regional Queensland. He wrote the following:
"I write to you at my wits end ... The people who shop in the shopping centre I am in are struggling... my business has dropped 65 per cent in sales over the last 3 months. I have already had to lay off three of my seven staff... I'm scared I'm going to lose my business to bankruptcy. I'm scared my parents are going to lose their family home as it is security for my business loan."
As the global recession hit Australia, letters like these began to come in as a trickle, and then a flood.
As the economic situation changed in Australia and around the world, the Government was faced with a radically new challenge of countercyclical fiscal policy.
Being an economic conservative doesn't mean standing idly by while the Australian economy is destroyed by forces for which we had no responsibility. Being an economic conservative meant rapidly expanding the direct role of government in the economy as private sector activity collapsed.
This Australian Government, despite the clamour of opposition, decided to intervene dramatically to maintain financial market confidence and to support the real economy: 
- The Government moved quickly in October 2008 to prevent a financial panic by guaranteeing the security of all 16 million Australian deposit holders for the first time in this Government's history. 
- Second, the Government also guaranteed bank wholesale funding, giving Australian banks access to the foreign capital they needed to continue the flow of credit to Australian businesses - again, for the first time in Australia's history. 
- Third, to keep the economy afloat in the short term, we implemented an immediate stimulus of $27 billion, including cash payments, the trebling of the first home owners' boost and an increased business tax break for private investment - actions we added to in December 2008 and February 2009 as we calibrated a series of short-, medium- and long-term stimulus measures to make a difference in the real economy.
As we implemented our economic stimulus plan, we had one eye on the urgent need to support the economy rapidly, and one eye on the future needs of sustainable economic growth: 
- That is why 65 per cent of total direct investment under the nation-building for recovery strategy is investment in medium- and long-term infrastructure 
- Over the medium term, the Government launched an investment program that would involve around 50,000 construction projects in every corner of the nation, including the largest school modernisation program this country has ever seen and record investments in social housing and shovel-ready local infrastructure projects. 
- Over the longer term, the Government's committed to major infrastructure investments including major rail, road, port, education and clean-energy infrastructure projects, and a national high-speed broadband network
As the IMF concluded: "the increase in public investment will continue to support activity in the near term, while addressing infrastructure shortfalls in the long term".
The Government was upfront with the Australian people about the magnitude and complexity of the challenges we faced, and of the magnitude and complexity of the economic strategy we were embarking upon to deal with the crisis, and we admitted from the outset that there would be many bumps along the way.
12 months on, I am proud of the success of Australia in navigating the global recession. It is a testament to the resilience of our people, the ability of the whole community - businesses, unions, workers, government - to pull together, and the clear direction of government economic policy from the beginning.
I am proud of the success of the Government's economic stimulus strategy.
I am proud of the more than 200,000 jobs that Treasury estimates were saved by the stimulus.
I am proud that so many Australian businesses kept their doors open while so many millions of businesses closed their doors abroad.
I am proud that Australia has had the shallowest downturn of all the major advanced economies.
I am proud of the fact that Australia was the only one of the major advanced economies not to go into recession.
And I am proud of the fact that we emerged from this global recession with the lowest debt and deficit of all the major advanced economies and our AAA credit rating intact.
Australia has therefore emerged from the global recession with one of the strongest economies in the developed world.
This should be a cause for confidence. It should be no cause for complacency. Being confident but not complacent means looking over the horizon at the challenges that are now developing beyond the here and now.
It means not resting on our laurels but capitalising on our successes. It means building lasting improvements to our economy by building new foundations for sustainable growth for the future.
Just as we worked hard to ensure our economy was the envy of the world during the downturn, we now must work hard to capitalise on that position as we move through the economic recovery phase and return to economic growth.
There is no doubt that Australia has rebounded from the global recession faster than most public and private sector forecasters had expected. 
- In the May 2009 budget, the Government forecast a contraction of GDP of half a percentage point for 2009-10. 
- This was revised up to positive 1.5 percent in Mid Year Economic and Financial Outlook, and the February 2010 Statement on Monetary Policy in which the RBA forecast 2 percent growth for 2009-10.
As we emerge from the global recession, I am stating unequivocally that the Australian Government's economic policy will continue to apply the principles of our economic strategy that we have implemented from the beginning:
- one, maintaining macro-economic stability through countercyclical fiscal policy;
- while two, continuing to build the foundations of long-term economic growth by continuing to invest in the drivers of productivity growth.
The Reserve Bank has already begun to adjust its policy settings to changing circumstances, gradually moving to lift interest rates from the historic lows reached at the depth of the crisis, although official rates as of today remain 3.25 percentage points lower than they were at pre-crisis levels.
Similarly, the Government's own fiscal settings have already passed the peak impact of growth because our stimulus strategy had been constructed to be targeted, timely and temporary. The impact of the stimulus peaked in the June quarter 2009 and has been phasing down ever since.
Importantly, the Government also announced in the May 2009 budget, fiscal rules that will calibrate fiscal policy for the recovery as we sought, once again, to be ahead of the curve: 
- The Government's 'expenditure rule' will cap the real growth in government expenditure to 2% once the economy returns to above trend growth - and this will apply until the budget returns to surplus. 
- Second, the Government's 'offsets rule' is already in force - requiring offsetting savings for any new expenditure. 
- Third, the Government's tax to GDP rule will ensure that the level of taxation remains lower on average than the level we inherited in 2007-08.
These fiscal rules are among the strongest and most credible in the world. As the IMF commented last year: "...the [Australian] Government's commitment to return to surpluses and achieve a positive budget balance on average over the medium term is commendable.
Few other advanced countries have adopted such a clear commitment".
These rules represent the continued embodiment of the Government's core commitment to fiscal conservatism - as the private sector rebounds, the Government's support will contract.
In summary, the Government's core economic principle of conservative countercyclical policy interventions is standing the test of the gyrations of the economic cycle. From boom to bust and recovery, the Government continues to apply constant principles to changing economic circumstances.
Thus far, I have been focussing primarily on the Government's strategy to deliver stable macroeconomic conditions across the economic cycle. However, as the Government has focussed on the various short-term economic challenges that we have confronted, we have never lost sight of our core long-term economic strategy - to reform Australia's economy for a sustainable economic future.
As I said in my first address to the Business Council of Australia after I became Leader of the Opposition back in 2007: "To stand still in a dynamic, competitive world is to go backwards. That's why I'm committed to the continuation of the reform process."
That reform process must be anchored in productivity growth, workforce participation and the development of a seamless national economy.
Let me turn first to productivity.
The long-term decline in productivity since the late 1990s is one of the most disturbing trends in Australia's economic performance. Between 1994 and 1999, Australia's productivity growth rate was second among OECD countries. However, since this surge, Australia's productivity growth has slowed. Between 1999 and 2007 we have slipped to 14th among OECD countries.
If we do not act now to lift Australia's productivity growth rate, the rate of improvement in Australia's average living standards will decline. That is why the productivity agenda lies at the heart of the Government's long-term economic strategy, and that is one of the core themes of the addresses I delivered prior to Australia Day this year around the nation in each of our nation's capital cities and states - focussed exclusively on the productivity challenge.
Without productivity growth, we do not have sustainable, long-term economic growth, and absent long-term sustainable economic growth, we do not have the enduring basis for rising living standards, let alone the investment in the social and economic infrastructure we need for the future.
Infrastructure is a critical ingredient for our future productivity growth.
According to the International Monetary Fund, in developed countries like Australia, an increase in the public infrastructure stock by 1 percentage points leads to an increase in output by around 0.2 percent. Yet despite this link, measures of Australia's infrastructure investment in recent decades show a trend decline. A 2009 OECD report shows that Australia's investment in transport, storage and communications infrastructure as a percentage of GDP fell between the 1980s and 1990s, and fell again in the first decade of this century.
If this trend continues, Australia will fall further behind other nations on productivity and therefore in the long term on future growth and living standards.
Australia's shortfall on infrastructure investment has generated a gap between the infrastructure we've got and the infrastructure we need. We see this in our ports, in freight, in rail, on our roads and in broadband, in the clogging of our cities.
Over the past two years, our Government has been acting decisively to turn around this national infrastructure performance. We've established Infrastructure Australia to provide national leadership to setting priorities and evaluating projects. We've undertaken regulatory reforms to remove roadblocks to infrastructure investment. And we have embarked on the biggest nation building infrastructure program in this country's history:
- A $36 billion transport infrastructure plan including doubling investment in roads, quadrupling investment in rail and investing in the nation's ports for the first time.
- A $43 billion investment in a National Broadband Network - the infrastructure of the 21st century that will deliver super-fast broadband, turbo-charging businesses and transforming our classrooms and our hospitals.
This investment in transport and communications infrastructure is helping support the economy during the economic downturn, filling the gap in investment activity caused by the global financial crisis, but in the long run it helps build our future prosperity.
The Commonwealth Government also recognises the continuing important role of state governments in infrastructure provision.
I'd make the point that the Australian Government's health reform package of itself represents a significant step forward in freeing up state government balance sheets to re-focus their effort on critical state investment in infrastructure. Embarking on health reform, the Government is also therefore undertaking reform to the finances of the Federation.
Treasury estimates that without action, health and hospitals spending would consume the entire revenue raised by the states and territory governments of Australia over the next 20 to 30 years - the entire revenue.
The Government's reforms are estimated to relieve state budgets of some $15 billion of health spending over the coming decade. This will provide the states with additional capacity to invest in the roads, the public transport, the urban infrastructure necessary to support our cities and our regions in the future.
Here in Victoria, it will mean reduced funding pressure on the Victorian Government of $3.8 billion over the next decade. That is $3.8 billion that can be spent on Victorian infrastructure that in the absence would not be possible if we do not bring about our health reforms, and it is another good reason, therefore, why we should all, as a nation, pursue fundamental health reform.
Today I'm in Victoria, and tomorrow again I look forward to meeting with Premier Brumby and looking forward to further constructive discussions on the future of our health and hospital system. The time for reform is now.
Another part of the Government's productivity agenda lies in skills. The Government is building a world-class education system, skills and training that will provide and prepare our kids for jobs in both the traditional trades on the one hand and in the industries of the future on the other. We want to give Australian children the skills and tools to compete with the rest of the world for the high-skill and high-wage jobs of the future.
That is why we are right now in the process of:
1) Establishing a single national school curriculum with an emphasis on the 3 Rs: Reading, Writing and Arithmetic.
2) Providing parents with information on their children's' and schools' performance at school to help lift the standards of all schools, not just some.
3) Building state-of-the-art Trades Training Centres to service each of our nation's 2,500 secondary schools to help kids learn a trade and address future skill shortages.
4) Delivering the digital education revolution to schools so that by the end of 2011 each of our nation's Year 9-12 students will have access to computers in their school. 
5) Undertaking the largest school modernisation program in Australia's history, including state-of-the-art 21st century libraries, totally digitally connected, as well as science centres, language centres and other classroom innovations.
6) Providing an additional three quarters of a million training places across the economy.
7) Investing in a further 50,000 university places across the country.
These are among the critical building blocks of an education revolution, a skills revolution, an innovation revolution - all as part of what must call in time a productivity revolution.
One of the most significant consequences of an ageing population is lower levels of workforce participation. The ageing of the population is expected to reduce the workforce participation rate from around 65 per cent now to around 60 per cent by 2049-50, which has the potential to result in slower economic growth and slower growth in family incomes.
To express this expected fall in workforce participation in another way, consider the following:
- In 1970, there were 7.5 people in Australia of working age to pay tax and support every person over the age of 65. 
- Today, there are five. 
- By 2050, there will be just 2.7 people of working age to pay taxes for every person over the age of 65.
These are dramatic changes. To counter the effect of the ageing of the population on prosperity, we must support higher real incomes through productivity growth and encouraging the participation - the maximum participation - of those working age Australians in our workforce. Since coming to office, the Government has already implemented major long-term initiatives to this end. 
- We have established Australia's first-ever of Paid Parental Leave, coming into effect from January of next year. 
- We have increased the child care rebate from 30% to 50% to support parents return to work. 
- We have introduced a 'Compact with Young Australians' called 'Learning or Earning', which means that means that young people under the age of 21 without a Year 12 or equivalent qualification must be in education or training in order to qualify for youth allowance.
- Our national health reform agenda includes the largest-ever commitment to preventative health initiatives, and initiatives to improve management of chronic diseases, to help prevent ill health from excluding Australians from work and further impeding workforce participation.
Health has a major impact on workforce participation. Efforts to reduce chronic disease could result in as many as 175,000 extra people into the workforce in the decades ahead.
Access Economics estimates that illnesses associated with chronic pain cost Australia $11.7 billion every year in lost work days. It is estimated that there is a $16 billion annual loss in productivity due to mild to moderate mental illness in the community.
Boosting workforce participation represents another reason for backing long-term health reform. Let me be even blunter: unless we act on comprehensive health reform, we will see a radical reduction in the number of Australians of working age participating actively in the workforce, thereby undermining long-term productivity, living standards and overall economic growth.
Health reform is not just a social policy imperative. Health reform, equally, is an economic policy imperative.
If we are to lift productivity growth, foster greater workforce participation and manage the challenges of population growth, we must also plan and build better cities.
Australia's major cities contribute nearly 80 per cent of national Gross Domestic Product. 
They also provide employment for 75 per cent of the nation's workforce.
Stronger, more sustainable and more liveable Australian cities mean a stronger Australian economy and an enhanced lifestyle for our people. This is an important long-term priority for this Government, and one which cuts across many portfolios including infrastructure, transport, water, housing and the environment, and at all levels of government as well.
Unlike our predecessors, we believe that the Commonwealth Government has a significant role to play in the future of cities policy. Our first step when we came to government was to re-engage with cities policy after a decade of neglect:
- We moved quickly to establish Infrastructure Australia and alongside it we established the Major Cities Unit.
- We started a major investment program for our cities in transport, communications, housing, health, education and community infrastructure.
- And for the first time in the federation's history we have reached a landmark agreement with the states and local governments to have strategic planning in our cities that meets national criteria as a precondition - as a precondition - for further federal investment in urban infrastructure.
Earlier this month, the Government also produced the nation's first ever State of Australian Cities report. The report benchmarks Australian cities with key cities abroad and represents and presents the facts about our cities across a range of indicators - economic, environmental and social.
The State of Australian Cities report will inform Australia's national urban policy to be released later this year with a focus on three core themes - productivity, sustainability and livability:
- To have productive cities, we need cities with world-class transport and communications infrastructure that are well planned and that create hubs of innovation and high-paid jobs.
- To have sustainable cities, we need to have cities that use less energy, produce less carbon emissions, have more public transport and less reliance on cars, and sustainably use our water resources.
- To have liveable cities, we need to have affordable housing, communities that are linked to schools and hospitals and health services, and local infrastructure that creates a sense of community and promotes active lifestyles.
Already, the Australian Government is engaging in the key areas of city policy - productivity, liveability and sustainability.
First, we recognize that productive cities are critical to creating jobs and supporting high standards of living. The key elements of city productivity are infrastructure, innovation, and planning.
As I said earlier, we're investing a record $36 billion in transport infrastructure. This infrastructure will make our cities more productive, and connect our towns and regions like never before.
Here in Victoria, we are already investing the following:
- almost $1 billion to upgrade the Western Ring Road - a key freight route; and
- over $3 billion in the Regional Rail Link, the first major, new rail line for metropolitan Melbourne in 80 years. Think about that - the first major, new rail line for metropolitan Melbourne in 80 years.
- For the first time, the Australian Government has taken a decision to invest in urban rail.
- For the first time the Australian government is investing in urban water, and that is because these are fundamental underpinnings of the future efficiency of our cities.
We're also supporting innovation in our cities. When we look at the critical role being played by infrastructure, we turn also to the National Broadband Network, which will transform Melbourne and our nation's other major cities.
- NBN Co has announced that construction in Melbourne will commence in Brunswick, with a pilot program of 3,000 homes and businesses.
- The roll-out of fibre-to-the-premises technology has already commenced in Tasmania. 
- And a rollout almost 6,000 km of new fibre optic backbone links will connect over 100 regional locations along the routes to the six priority areas of Geraldton, Darwin, Emerald and Longreach, Broken Hill, Victor Harbor and South West Gippsland - parts of Australia that currently are not properly serviced by this information highway of the 21st century.
As I said, we're also supporting innovation in our cities. Here in Melbourne, we have invested in key university infrastructure that will support innovation, like:
- Latrobe Institute for Molecular Sciences
- Centre for Neural Engineering at Melbourne University
- The National Centre for Synchrotron Science; and
- The Melbourne Neuroscience Project.
Furthermore, the Government is working to improve city planning. As I noted before, in December last year the Australian Government led a landmark agreement for the first time in the country's history with states and territories for national criteria for the strategic planning of capital cities. 
- This deal will ensure that states and territories will have in place best practice capital city strategic plans by 1 January 2012. 
- Future Commonwealth funding to state governments will be contingent on this objective.
- COAG has also agreed to the COAG Reform Council driving this reform process, with the support of a small expert panel, jointly appointed by all jurisdictions, and reporting to the Council of Australian Governments.
Finally, on liveability, our investments are also designed to make our cities more liveable.
In particular, the Government is working to make housing more affordable. The Government began by establishing a Minister for Housing. Before we came to office, there was none at the federal level. This was a problem.
The previous government, apparently, did no attach priority to this. This government does.
The Government has also been active in housing policy. 
- Our National Rental Affordability Scheme is stimulating the supply of new affordable rental dwellings across the country. 
- Our $500 million Housing Affordability Fund is working to lower the cost of building new homes by removing barriers to supply. 
- First Home Saver Accounts are encouraging individuals to save for their first home over the medium-to-long term. 
- And we are investing $5.6 billion to build around 19,300 new units of social housing and repair more than 70,000 units of existing social housing the single largest investment by the Australian Government in the social housing stock of the nation.
- Furthermore, more than 200,000 Australians have benefited so far from the First Home Owners Boost.
Making housing more affordable means an increase in the housing stock in both greenfield developments and in brownfield redevelopments.
That is why today I am pleased to announce the next step in our policy to increase housing supply - a $50 million investment in housing-related infrastructure. This is part and parcel of the operation of the National Housing Affordability Fund.
This investment will deliver more than 7,000 new lots and dwellings between 6 and 14 months faster than would otherwise have been the case.
It will deliver cost savings to home purchasers that will average approximately $20,000.
This investment is part of our Housing Affordability Fund, which reduces costs incurred as a result of planning and approval delays and infrastructure costs, such as water, sewerage, transport, and open space.
Here in Victoria we are providing investment to prepare a Precinct Structure Plan for Ballarat. This will fast track land supply in the area, bringing forwarded much-needed construction by some 330 days.
These investments build infrastructure for local communities, unlock housing supply and improve housing affordability. It supports growth in built-up areas, in outer suburban areas, and in regional areas. It will be welcome news for families looking for a new home in many parts of the country - but much more remains to be done.
Too many Australians are locked out of the housing market - working families, in our view, deserve a better deal. Our Government is taking action to turn around this particular challenge, investing in infrastructure and reforming planning so we can build more houses and there are more affordable houses for working families.
The purpose of the housing affordability fund is to begin to bring about fundamental change in infrastructure costs and planning to boost housing affordability for working families. Infrastructure costs are at present keeping too many homebuyers out of the home market. This cannot be sustained for the future.
That's why housing affordability in all of its dimensions will remain a core part of the Government's future reform agenda with state and territories, both in greenfield developments, urban consolidation, and effective social and economic infrastructure planning.
Working families deserve a better deal when it comes to long-term housing affordability and infrastructure charging and in planning reform. That is why we will have more to say in the future through the future operation of our National Housing Affordability Fund.
The Government, also, is seeking to support sustainability in our cities. We are committed to ambitious emissions reduction targets and are implementing a comprehensive nationwide response to climate change.
The Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme is central to our plan to reduce Australia's greenhouse gas emissions. 
- We're also investing $4.5 billion in a Clean Energy Initiative that will support Solar Flagship projects, Carbon Capture and Storage demonstration projects, and renewable technology innovation.
- We are improving household efficiency by mandating new 6-star ratings for new homes.
- We are making commercial buildings more energy efficient through the Green Building Fund.
- And we are supporting public transport infrastructure to give families more choices about how they get around.
Together, these investments are important down payments on creating the sustainable Australian cities we need for the future.
To conclude, I remain an optimist about Australia's future.
This country is a no nonsense country, hardworking and full of hard-headed people who are not afraid of a challenge.
When the rest of the world last year sank into the global recession, our nation kept swimming and kept swimming alone. When unemployment queues around the world grew longer and longer last year, business, unions and the Australian Government joined together to save literally hundreds of thousands of Australian jobs.
When there are battles for the right causes, our nation is always there for the fight, and when our friends are in need - at home or abroad - we are always there to lend a helping hand.
We, therefore, and I, as Prime Minister, am deeply proud of the nation that I lead. That is why I am determined to continue to deliver stable economic management that keeps our economy strong while at the same time building prosperity for the long term, and that includes building long-term, sustainable, prosperous, productive Australian cities.
I thank you.


It is good to be back home; it's good to be back in Brisbane; good to be back in Queensland; good to be back at this great hospital; good to be back at a part of this hospital which is a part of a great university, a great Australian university, the University of Queensland, and thank you all for taking some time out this morning to be with us as we continue to expound our vision for the future of the National Health and Hospitals Network and the importance of reform, and the importance of placing this system of ours onto a sustainable basis for the long-term future.
It's been great this morning to see some of the work done here in this hospital and as part of the research work of this university. We've seen the Centre, whose world-class clinical research has a strong focus on patient-oriented care.
The work being done here testifies to what can be achieved when governments and universities work together in partnership and work together in partnership with private philanthropy, as well. I congratulate the Queensland Government, Atlantic Philanthropies and the University of Queensland for what you have achieved in just two years since the Centre was formally opened, and I wish you the very best for your ongoing work.
Can I say also to you more broadly as a medical profession, a nursing profession, those who are concerned about the wellbeing of humans, dealing with the range of physical and psychological challenges which our human family faces, how much I admire your profession. The fact that you're out there, at the coal face, assisting people in what are very dark and troubling times for many: the human consequences, the human face of physical illness and the uncertainties which that brings to so many families on a daily basis; the fact that you, as nursing professionals, allied health professionals, the fact you as medicos, general practitioners, specialists, working to improve the lot of our fellow Australians and our fellow human beings is a tribute to your profession, and for those of you at the cutting edge of medical research and science, can I say how much we hold you in admiration as well.
I'm constantly stunned when I look at the vibrance of the medical research in Australia. Given that we are a country of modest population against the other great centres of population around the world, it's still from this and this great medical research tradition that we have in this country constantly producing world leaders, world-class research, out there ahead of the field, prompting others around the world to follow in our path, collaborating with others around the world who are the best in their field
So, as I begin my remarks today, can I simply use this opportunity to salute the profession for its professionalism and its dedication to the care of the sick in our community.
Today I want to take forward the national debate on the future of Australia's health care system. I am pleased to do this in the presence of so many clinicians, researchers, academics and other health professionals because in the process of driving a long-term agenda for healthcare reform, the Australian Government has been listening intently to the voices of people like you right across the country.
Together with Nicola and with Justine we have visited more than 100 hospitals across Australia in the last six months or so - big ones and little ones, every state of the Commonwealth and in both territories. Myself, I've conducted seminars of three hours at a stretch in about 20-25 hospitals across the country, myself. I am now, I am told, being invited to become officially a member of the AMA and of the Australian Nursing Federation and now will be asked to provide minor procedures myself in various A&amp;Es across the country. That was a joke, but I feel as if I am now so part and parcel of how hospitals work on the ground and the great work which is done in them that when I turn each corner I am now greeting something which is no longer foreign to me but entirely familiar.
What we have done in developing this national reform plan is not simply pick an idea of a shelf. We commissioned Christine Bennett to undertake an 18-month long review of the entire system - the National Health and Hospital Reform Commission, which went around the country, which comprised of folks from right across the professions associated with our health and hospitals system. They delivered us a report in July of last year with 123 recommendations. That was step one.
Step two was then to take those 123 recommendations, as Nicola and Justine and I have done, and road test them with health and hospital communities right across the nation, and through multiple presentations asked 'what are your views on how this would work in your hospital, in your health community?', and frankly, that's the basis of what we've put forward to the Australian People in this new National Health and Hospitals Network - not an idea plucked out of space, not an idea plucked off the shelf somewhere, not an idea just plucked abstractly out of a foreign health system, but one which has been crafted from the ground up and tested against you, the health and medical professionals of our nation.
The message we've heard from these consultations has been loud and clear, and the message is this: Australia's health and hospital system is crying out for reform. Its foundations are fractured, and its foundations must be fixed. This requires fundamental structural reform - reform that restores financial integrity to the healthcare system and makes it sustainable for the long term future, and reform that tackles the continual cost-shifting and blame-shifting which takes place between the different levels of government.
The problems of cost-shifting and blame-shifting are direct consequences of this system's current structure. The system that we currently have is fragmented. It has no clear lines of responsibility. It is a system that wastes resources. It leaves too many patients waiting at the end of longer and longer queues. It is increasingly unable to cope with the strains under which it operates, despite the best efforts - the absolute best efforts - of our dedicated frontline doctors, nurses and allied health professionals. It often leaves key decisions in the hands of bureaucrats far too remote from the communities that health professionals serve. It is built around institutions and hospitals and not around the needs of patients, and it is unprepared for the challenges of the future: the challenges represented by an ageing population; the rise in chronic disease rates; the challenge of workforce shortages; and the rising cost of medical care.
These are challenges bearing down on the Australian health and hospital system now. They are bearing down on the health and hospital systems of all advanced economies around the world.
That is why we must therefore embrace fundamental health and hospital reform. We must repair the fractured foundations of the system so that we can build better hospitals and better health services for the future.
The Health Reform Commission, the Bennett Commission, concluded last year after 18 months of work the system itself, right now, is at tipping point and existing funding and functional arrangements simply do not add up to sustainable arrangements for the medium- to long- term future. Simply increasing funding - as some have suggested - without fundamental structural reforms will just perpetuate cost-shift and blame-shift and financial waste.
The Australian Government is not prepared to simply offer the states a big, blank cheque in a system riddled with overlap, duplication and waste. That would not solve the problem. That would just add another expensive bandaid to the problem and it would be financially irresponsible to do so.
Our approach is clear cut: first, reform the system to eliminate overlap, duplication and waste with the establishment of a new National Health and Hospitals Network - one that is funded nationally and run locally.
And second, then fund the system properly for the future with the Australian Government for the first time becoming the dominant funder of the hospital system for the future, the exclusive funder of the primary care health system for the future, the exclusive funder of the aged care system for the future. These are the two elements of our reform program - fix the structure, fund the future. That's what we're on about.
But, if we can get this in place, the fundamental reforms that is are necessary to repair the system, to eliminate overlap, duplication and waste and to make the system financially robust for the future, the Australian Government can and will increase its investment in current areas of critical need in the health and hospital system today.
Today I am announcing how primary care will be better co-ordinated and fit with our commitment to Local Hospital Networks in the future. I will also be outlining the same for aged care. I will also be outlining new investments in aged care as well. These are significant additions to the package of measures that is already on the table ahead of the meeting of the Council of Australian Governments in Canberra one week from today.
As we announce these measures today, I reiterate this core point: we cannot deliver these new investments without the fundamental, structural reform of the National Health and Hospitals Network. If we are to allocate increased funding to our health system's future needs - like the $15 billion of growth in health care costs over the decade ahead - we must have the confidence that the foundations upon which we build are sound, are robust and are properly planned. We must be sure that our increased investments in our National Health and Hospitals Network will deliver real improvements to patient care on the ground.
This morning I want to set out why the Government's plan for the National Health and Hospitals Network - the NHHN, a network that is nationally funded and run locally - provides the strong foundations for these new investments to occur. The shift to a nationally funded health network represents a major financial reform for our Federation. Crucially, it will create a secure funding base for the health system for the future. It is a major financial reform that firstly, will help to end the blame game.
Some have been calling for additional resources without any change to the structure of the fundamental structure of the health system. Premier Brumby's health proposal seeks around $40 billion over four years or $150 billion over 10 years, but it is not a financially responsible blueprint for the future of Australia's healthcare system. It does not grapple with the need for fundamental reform of the system which at present encourages ineffective duplication and waste and it would require a massive increase in taxes.
Let me also recap what this Government has done in the two years that it has been in office:
     * Firstly, we have already made record investments, some $64 billion for the health and hospitals system starting from last year - delivering an additional $20 billion compared to the previous agreement. That is a 50 percent increase on the previous Australian Health and Hospitals Agreement;
     * Secondly, $750 million in separate investments to lift the performance of our Emergency Departments;
     * Thirdly, $500 million in investment in sub-acute care;
     * Fourthly, investments also in elective surgery, delivering some additional 62,000 procedures across the country;
     * Fifthly, $2.3 billion for cancer care, including, for the first time, $1.3 billion in cancer care infrastructure and a network of regional integrated cancer networks across our nation so that those suffering from cancer in major communities outside our capital cities can have the large part of their treatment delivered in the regions much closer to home;
     * We've also invested in some 2,000 transitional care places;
     * We've made a $275 million investment in 36 GP Super Clinics across the country to expand the network of primary care, and;
     * We've begun the largest ever investment in preventative health care;
But, ladies and gentlemen, this is just the start. This is what we have sought to do in our first two years in office. We have not been standing still, waiting for the Bennett Commission to report. We have not been standing still waiting for the deliberations that we have made as a Government in response to Bennett's 123 recommendations. This is what has been occurring on the ground over the last two years.
When I was last at the RBH I saw the practical manifestation of that through the investments that we are making to elective surgery through the enhancements to the operating theatres here in this hospital - two of them.
That sort of work is happening right across the country right now, as it's occurring in emergency departments right across the country right not - but this is just the beginning. We have much more to do.
Our blueprint for the National Health and Hospitals Network will substantially increase the Commonwealth's funding for health and hospitals into the future. The Commonwealth will fund the dominant share of services delivered in our public hospitals, and will do so permanently. The Commonwealth will also provide the dominant share for the future training, buildings, equipment and research costs for our public hospitals - permanently. In the past, Commonwealth provided zero for these functions. We now become the dominant funder for the future.
This would see the Commonwealth take on the lion's share, also, of growth in the public hospitals system and relieve state and territory budgets of around $15 billion over the decade ahead. Without this reform, the Treasury, the Commonwealth Treasury, estimates that health budgets of the states and territories will consume the entire revenues of the states and territories by the time we reach the middle of the century, progressively from 2035 on. In other words, not a single dollar left to spend on anything else other than health and hospitals. That is why this is a fundamental financial reform for the federation and its future itself.
This major financial reform will also allow us to improve the quality of patient care in Australia with tough new national standards, backed up by increased transparency across the health system.
The shift to a national funding model will repair our federation and make sure our health system does not buckle under the weight of its own pressure. Just as significantly, the shift to a locally run model of Local Hospital Networks will also repair the fundamentals of how hospitals are run. Local Hospital Networks will deliver the services most appropriate to their communities. They will reflect local clinician knowledge and expertise. These clinicians, together with local nurses and allied health professionals, will have a core and expanded role in the local governing councils of local hospital networks. We want local needs to be reflected in the decisions taken by our clinicians.
The Commonwealth is prepared to shoulder the lion's share of future hospital growth over the coming decades but only if there are greater levels of transparency of where taxpayer dollars are being spent. Paying Local Hospital Networks directly rather than through the states will achieve this for the first time.
The Commonwealth's funding will be directed to hospitals that are responsible for delivering services. Let me state that again - the Australian Government will be funding Local Hospital Networks direct, rather than simply translating that funding through the health bureaucracies of the states. That is a core part of the reform that we are proposing. This would also reward innovation and efficiency, since those Local Hospital Networks that eliminate waste will have extra resources to deliver extra services.
My conclusion, having been around so many hospitals like this great hospital around the nation is that the competence and the leadership of local clinicians, nursing professionals, allied health professionals, is that they actually know where savings are to be made in their systems and in their structures. They actually know how to better deliver health services within their communities, and they actually want some head room to be able to do that and then to re-invest what they save from that in the expansion of the services they provide. That, I believe, is a core part of this reform, as well.
Another fundamental structural reform is the Australian Government's commitment to take full responsibility for primary health care. For most Australians, GP and GP-related services are their most frequent point of interaction with the health care system.
GP care is critical to Australians of all ages. Last year, there were more than 110 million GP visits in Australia. For 22 million of us, that's a lot of visits to the doctor, yet access to GP and related services differs widely across Australia. Many Australians cannot see a GP when they need one. When they do, services - not always - often poorly coordinated, with too many patients waiting weeks for an appointment, then given the run around from GPs to specialists to allied health professionals.
The way we fund health services does nothing to support the coordination of GP and related services, nor prepare us for the challenge of managing the growing burden of chronic disease, and when our GP and related services let people down, there's one part of the system that always picks up the tab - our hospitals, and that's the most expensive part of the system. That's bad for the system, bad for the proper use of the taxpayers' dollar, but also bad for the patient.
Australia's hospitalisation rates prove that fact, with Australia recording significantly higher hospitalisation rates than comparable nations like the US and the UK, a rate higher than the average across all the advanced economies represented by the OECD.
Improving primary care, therefore, is a core priority to fixing our healthcare system. With better primary care, we would substantially reduce the estimated 441,000 potentially preventable hospitalisations that burden our health budget at an average cost of $4,230 per episode of care. Let me run those figures by you again: we could substantially reduce the estimated 441,000 potentially preventable hospitalisations that burden our health budget at present at an average cost of $4,230 per episode of care - and we can achieve better health for Australian families.
That is why under the plan for the National Health and Hospitals Network that will go to Council of Australian Governments next week, the Australian Government will assume full responsibility for primary care health services, and to that end, today I can announce a key part of the governing arrangements of the National Health and Hospitals Network: the establishment of local primary health care organisations, a new network of primary health care across Australia.
These local primary health care networks will have a key role in linking up the different parts of our health system beyond local hospitals. They will be built from the existing network of Divisions of GPs so that they don't create additional bureaucracy. They will have strong links to Local Hospital Networks, servicing common communities of interest to the Local Hospital Networks. They will also be strongly linked to local communities, health professionals and service providers, including GPs, allied health professionals and Indigenous medical services.
The responsibilities of these new networks will include:
     * Working with Local Hospital Networks and GPs to assist with patients' transition out of hospital, so that they can continue to receive all the care they need, of the type that I've seen at work here in the Royal Brisbane and Women's Hospital this morning;
     * Secondly, ensuring allied health care is available for people with chronic conditions, as identified in personalised care plans prepared by GPs;
     * Third, working with local health care professionals to ensure services co-operate with each other so that patients can easily and conveniently access the full range of services that they need;
     * Fourth, identifying groups in local communities that are missing out on GP and primary health care services, or services that a local area needs; and
     * Fifth, delivering also, at a local level, health promotion and preventive health care programs targeted to risk factors in communities in cooperation with the new Australian National Preventive Health Agency.
With the Australian Government taking responsibility for primary health care services we will be able to achieve better coordinated health care, greater innovation in health service and ultimately better outcomes for patients. Together with Local Hospital Networks, local primary health care networks will improve patient care and quality of health and hospital services.
For example, they will have a key role in delivering enhanced patient services for the 1.1 million Australians suffering now from diabetes, expected to rise to 2.2 million over the coming decades ahead. This is part and parcel of a particular program announced by the Health Minister during the course of the last week.
In addition, to ensure that older Australians are served as best as they can, the Government will move towards establishing aged care networks that better integrate aged care with other parts of the health system in primary and acute care. They will ensure a community of services which work with one another to provide better integrated and more efficient care across the entire health system.
In other words, if you look overall at the scheme of the system that we are seeking to build as part of this new National Health and Hospitals Network, you will have local hospital networks, you will have primary care networks, and you will have aged care networks servicing broadly common communities of interest. The longer term ambition of our reform is to further integrate the delivery of integrated health care across common communities of interest.
At present, these networks, informally, perhaps, talk to each other. In many part of Australia, regrettably, they don't talk at all. Therefore, the guiding philosophy of what we're seeking to do here is to integrate the best form of health care, integrated care, for a patient, be it in the primary system, the acute system, post-acute or in fact in the aged care network, and that is to be done through the system of structural reforms that I've outlined here today.
Furthermore, today I am announcing major new investments in aged care.
The rationale for these new investments is better patient care for Australians and better integration of aged care with other parts of the health and hospitals network. When we announced our reform plan, the Queensland Premier rightly pointed to the need for further investment and reform in aged care. She was right, absolutely right. We agree, and we value her input to these practical initiatives.
The aged care system today is fragmented, with divided responsibilities between Commonwealth and state governments. This makes it difficult for older people and their carers to find and access the care that best suits their particular needs.
Too many older Australians spend more time than they need to in public hospital beds because of a shortage of aged care beds - in 2006, there were 2,400 patients in hospital beds waiting for an aged care place despite having been classified for an aged care place, but no aged care place was in fact available.
Too many older Australians are unnecessarily admitted to hospital because of a lack of adequate GP and primary care in aged care homes. It is estimated that 31 per cent of transfers from aged care homes to hospitals, about 27,000 admissions per year, could be avoided through better GP care in aged care homes.
The Government will therefore invest $739 million in aged care to better support older Australians. This investment will support around 5,000 aged care places or beds, and help to end the blame game that hurts hospitals and aged care services at present.
These investments are possible because the Australian Government is taking full policy and funding responsibility for aged care for the future. In other words, because we're repairing the foundations of the system we are able to invest confidently in new services and expanded care.
As part of the package being announced today, we will help make navigating the aged care system easier for patients by investing $32 million in creating a network of one-stop shops across the country, providing a central point of contact for older Australians and their families needing information and access to aged care. These will form part of future Aged Care Networks which will ultimately ensure that aged care is coordinated with hospitals and GP and primary health services as I outlined before.
We will expand capacity in the system by investing $143 million to provide an additional 2,500 aged care places through the Zero Real Interest Loans Program. We will build on the successful Multi Purpose Service model in rural and regional communities by providing new capital funding of $120 million for 286 sub-acute beds or their equivalent. This investment will strengthen the provision of hospital services and aged care in our rural communities.
We will increase financial incentives to encourage GPs to provide services to patients in aged care homes - adding 105,000 extra services for aged care patients over the next four years. Improving aged care must be an ongoing priority for the Australian Government.
I want to be very clear - and absolutely clear - about today's announcement: this is not a panacea for aged care in Australia.
The truth is aged care has been poorly planned in the past. That's the absolute truth of it - including the proper planning and remuneration structure of the aged care workforce. The Australian Nurses Federation has been very clear in raising these concerns with the Australian Government and the Government intends to deal with these concerns one by one as part of the overall reform of the national health, hospital and aged care network.
This will take time, but we are determined to undertake this work.
Today I have announced the first step in that reform with an investment of some 5,000 more beds, and with, for the first time, the announcement of the Commonwealth's intention to take full funding and policy responsibility for all aged care services.
But this will not solve, as I said before, all of the challenges of aged care, particularly in the face of increasing demand. We understand that reform is needed in the future - in particular, reforms to the aged care workforce, including the nurses that are the backbone of the aged care sector.
Day and night, it is the Registered Nurses and personal carers in aged care facilities who care for our older Australians. Without supporting our hard-working nurses and personal carers, our aged care system - already under pressure - cannot be expected to cope with the demands of an ageing population.
The measures I have announced today are a very important first step. We must address the challenges facing the aged care sector to place the sector on sound footing for the future. That is why we have asked the Productivity Commission to undertake a major inquiry into the aged care system and as the Productivity Commission undertakes its work, we will continue to work with our partners in the sector to confront the challenges facing our aged care system.
I will have more to say on this in coming months, but I want to make clear our very serious commitment to reform for the aged care system is there on the record, and this includes our fundamental commitment to ensuring that frontline staff who care daily for our patients and grandparents in aged care facilities around the country are supported in their most important work.
To conclude, coming back to this hospital brings back to me many personal memories. I remember coming here as a child. My father was admitted here having suffered road trauma, and he died here, so for many Australians hospitals are not just clinical institutions. They embody within them memories, memories which are deep and memories which are personal, and it's that human dimension to health and hospital reform which we must never lose sight of. Hospitals, for so many people, represent hopes, they represent fears, they represent joy and they represent tragedy - but they are therefore an important and critical part, frankly, of the Australian fabric of life.
The Government has outlined a comprehensive plan to repair the fundamentals of our health and hospitals network and on the new stronger foundations of the National Health and Hospitals Network we can build better hospitals and better health care for the future.
As I have said from the start, we recognise the scale of the challenge that we have taken on. These are the most significant changes to the health system in three decades, since the introduction of Medicare. We recognise, too, that there is still further work to be done in other areas of the health care system - including mental health, dental health and preventative health care.
But, as I have made clear today, as a matter of basic fiscal responsibility, as a matter of basic financial responsibility, we cannot and will not make new investments into our health care system without fixing the system first. Let me repeat - we cannot and will not make fundamental new investments in the future of our health and hospitals system unless we fix first the structure of that system.
That is why we must have the support of the state and territory governments in advancing the national health reform agenda. With the further details we have set out in the past two days we are presenting an even better deal to every state and territory government and for all Australians.
I will continue to press this case forcefully with premiers and chief ministers over coming days as we continue working together in building this new National Health and Hospitals Network, not just for this generation of Australians, but for those who come after us as well.
To conclude, you as health professionals, you who have a passionate commitment to nursing, to medicine, to the various allied health professions that you represent, to those of you who are hospital administrators, to those of you who are administer various health regions across our nation, across this state, you are also part and parcel of this reform process. This is not simply to be an exercise transacted by politicians. Were that the case it would be doomed to failure.
When I say you as health professionals are absolutely fundamental to the reform process, if you believe the system needs fundamental reform, if you support the broad direct of reform I've outlined today, we need each and every one of you to get on the bus with us. This is going to be a difficult exercise in reform. There are some people that are holding out against it. I understand some of the reasons why, but can I say what I hear across the nation is a deep cry from working people, working families, from pensioners, from carers, but also those who work at the coal face themselves, the need to get on with the business of building better hospitals and a better health service for Australia's future.
I would invite you to be reformers with us in that process.
I thank you.


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
Last year I had the privilege of spending time with Alastair Morrison, not long before his death. Alastair was 93 years old, the last surviving son of Morrison of Peking, after whom this significant lecture is named. It was a singular privilege for me to have spent just a little time sharing Alastair's family memories - a unique human connection linking the tumultuous events of the late-Qing Empire to the rise of modern China.
For students of history, the world of Morrison's Peking seems exotic and remote. Whereas in truth, we are separated from that world by the span of just one lifetime - albeit, in Alastair's case, a long and well-lived life. 
Alastair in fact asked if I would deliver a Morrison Lecture. I said I it would be an honour.
And so today I am delighted to be able to present this, the 70th George E. Morrison Lecture.
George Morrison was a man surrounded by controversy. But no-one, not even his greatest detractors, could deny his deep knowledge of China and his fascination with this ancient and continuing civilisation. Morrison was one of a kind. Nonetheless, the truth is he is little known in contemporary Australia.
My view is that, 90 years after his death, it is time for that to change. 
Morrison is one of the most remarkable Australians in our early national history to enliven the world stage. And it is fitting that he is remembered by this, one of the earliest and oldest lecture series in this young country of ours.
Throughout its long history this lecture series has addressed many aspects of China's past and present. In recent years, presenters have wrestled with what has now become one of the truly great questions facing our contemporary age - the re-emergence, the rise and future global role of modern China.
C.P. FitzGerald, the noted historian of China, who established what was then the Department of Far Eastern History at the Australian National University, wrote of Morrison in the following terms:
"a man of unusual percipience and thus freer than many of his contemporaries from the prevailing dominant ideas. He, almost alone, could see beneath the dry bones of the dying Manchu Empire the stirring of fresh life, of a new, probably unintelligible and almost certainly disconcerting China, but yet a continuation of the life of that great nation into a new period of vigorous activity."
In 1935, delivering only the 5th Morrison Lecture, the noted physician Wu Lien-teh, a Malay of Chinese descent, remarked that in the person of Morrison there was a:
"blending of...qualities seldom encountered in a single individual... a physician, a journalist, a traveller, an author, a book collector and a humanist all combined."
In his travels, his sense of adventure, his curiosity for understanding and knowledge, George E. Morrison was an Australian one-off. He travelled relentlessly. Between his school and university studies, he walked from Geelong to Adelaide.
At the age of 20, he trekked from Normanton in Queensland, just south of the Gulf of Carpentaria, all the way to Melbourne - a journey of almost 3,300 km, covered without horse or camel. Besides his travels to China, Morrison ventured deep into New Guinea, studied medicine in Scotland, and travelled widely in the United States, the West Indies and Morocco. He came close to death on many occasions, and even had the rare honour of reading his own obituary in The Times, after erroneous reports of him being killed during the Boxer Uprising.
Morrison's curiosity and acute skills of observation helped make him a masterful writer. His talents were reflected in his 1895 book, An Australian in China, which so impressed readers in England that he was appointed in 1897 as the first permanent correspondent for The Times newspaper in Beijing. Over time he gained prominence in China and internationally, earning the nickname "Chinese Morrison" or "Morrison of Peking".
In many ways Morrison often placed himself in the centre of historical events, and always in the centre of danger. 
He was in southern China to report on the epoch-making rebellion of October 1911, which brought to an end two thousand years of dynastic rule. Back in the embattled imperial capital of Beijing, he landed the scoop of the millennium by reporting the abdication of the last Chinese emperor, Xuantong or, as he was more commonly known, Puyi.
He then witnessed the founding of the Republic of China, which ushered in the country's first, albeit short-lived, democratic elections, a nascent legal system and a boisterous free press.
As if his journalism did not bring him close enough to the action, Morrison then quit The Times to act as adviser to the second president of the Republic, Yuan Shikai- who notoriously in 1915 sought to re-establish the monarchy, proclaiming himself the Hongxian Emperor. For the record, reflecting perhaps an early Australian taste for republicanism, Morrison cautioned his then boss against this course of action.
Morrison's, in short, is a remarkable career.
So remarkable that the street on which he lived in central Beijing, known today as Wangfujing, was known throughout the years of the Chinese Republic as Morrison Street.
Morrison comes from a remarkable stable of Australian Sinologues, writers and public intellectuals.
Figures like:
- William Henry Donald - the journalist from Lithgow who became a political adviser to Sun Yat-Sen and later Chiang Kai-Shek;
- C.P. FitzGerald - the noted historian, academic leader and educator;
- Wang Gung-wu - historian of the Chinese diaspora, former head of this school and later Vice Chancellor of the University of Hong Kong;
- Liu Ts'un-yan - pre-eminent scholar of Confucianism, Daoism and Buddhism and former Head of the Department of Chinese;
- Ken Gardiner - lecturer in East Asian thought and history;
- Pierre Ryckmans - the much awarded art historian, novelist, and essayist;
- Stephen FitzGerald - the historian, public advocate for closer Australian engagement with Asia, and a man who became of course our first Ambassador to the People's Republic of China; 
- Ross Garnaut - economist, Prime Ministerial adviser and himself later Amabssador to China; and
- Professor Geremie Barmé - academic, film maker and writer whose particular understanding of China's past and its possible futures is recognised internationally.
What unites all of these figures is more than a deep knowledge of China. They all also bring, often from different political perspectives, a passionate, sympathetic but nonetheless clear-eyed analysis of the China of their time. In doing so, they have brought a certain "Australian objectivity" to the task.
An independence of approach.
An understanding that acknowledges the rich legacies of our western origins - but one admixed with a fascination for the ancient civilisations of our own region and their modern permutations.
This "Australian objectivity" seeks therefore to be informed, understanding and always quizzical. Tempered by what we would call common sense. Tempered also by a wry awareness of our own place in the region and the world.
And of course, our own sense of humour - although a sense of humour sometimes inexplicable to cultures other than our own.
We see this Australian tradition in the brilliant career of C.P. FitzGerald, British by birth and Australian by choice. 
FitzGerald was passionate about understanding China and communicating that knowledge to a broader public.
In his highly readable book Why China?, published in 1985 and which I recall reading as a young diplomat posted in Beijing at the time, C.P. dates his interest in China to the year 1917 when, as a young man, he read two articles in The Times by George E. Morrison. As FitzGerald recalled:
"Here was a vast world of fascinating history of which I knew nothing whatever: it did not enter into the school curriculum at all (a strong point in its favour)."
He went on to work in China and he soon set to learning Mandarin and classical Chinese. FitzGerald was deeply aware that a knowledge of contemporary China had to be grounded in an understanding of the histories, literature and philosophies of its past.
In his long career he wrote on China's dynastic past and modern revolution. On the fall of the Nationalists and the rise of the Communists. He wrote extensively on China's importance to the future of our region. Through his tireless public service as an educator and communicator he reached out to Australians at large, sharing his vast learning on China's history and the future.
After he came to Australia to work at the Australian National University, FitzGerald would develop a deep interest in both the Australian national identity and how that identity shapes our own engagement with China.
In particular, he supported this country pursuing its own interests and relationship with China, in ways free of those of the United Kingdom or the United States. Like other students of the Chinese world, C.P. FitzGerald knew how
China had for centuries loomed large in the Western mind. Hopes and fears, fantasies and nightmares were all readily projected on a land that for so long was regarded as an exotic "Far East". Whereas for us in Australia, China represented a much more immediate and practical reality to our near north.
In some respects, C.P. was pointing to the essential ingredients of a particular Australian perspective on China.
A perspective grounded in a knowledge of China's past, a practical appreciation of its present and an informed hope for the future. His view of China was neither captured by arid ideology nor a view that China was somehow simply a case study of some kind of cultural or political exotica.
For people like George E. Morrison, C.P. FitzGerald, Stephen Fitzgerald and others, China was never a canvas on which the West could simply cast its own feverish imaginings - utopian or apocalyptic.
It was always a vital, complex and powerful reality with which they became passionately involved. Theirs is a passion grounded in learning, cautious in approach yet always mitigated by empathy. China's view of its own role in the world is equally a complex mixture of hopes and concerns.
Its history  -  dynastic, Republican and contemporary  -  informs its re-emergent role.
Some say China's sense of its own history in fact emboldens its sense of future mission. Others would argue that these deep historical legacies do the reverse - that they call for measured caution on the part of China's contemporary leadership, given the litany of miscalculations littered across China's past. Either way, most would agree that China's historiography is one of abiding political and foreign policy relevance.
History is not just academic.
How China views its history very much shapes how China views its future.
For China, next year will see a seminal anniversary in the nation's most fraught modern history. 2011 marks the 100th anniversary of the end of the Chinese Empire and the beginning of the Chinese Republic.
Between now and October next year, we will see a flurry of Chinese commentaries, both official and otherwise, on the significance of the Xinhai Revolution of 1911 and China's trajectory since that time.
The Xinhai Revolution was a turning point in the history of Asia. It was the first major revolution in the region - hailed by Lenin as the "awakening of Asia". It created the first democratic republic in North Asia, emboldening movements for reform and self-determination that would later sweep the region.
For China it marked a break with dynastic autocracy and colonialism, initiating what some historians call an "age of openness". It is also significant today as an event that will be celebrated, in fraternal amity, on both sides of the Taiwan Straits.
2011 is also the 150th anniversary of the first concerted efforts by a Chinese government to become active in international affairs and to reform and strengthen itself. This occurred with the Tongzhi Restoration in 1861, aimed at reversing the fortunes of a dynasty beset by aggressive Western powers during the Opium Wars on the one hand, and internal rebellion through the Taiping Rebellion on the other.
This was a period of unprecedented change.
Some historians argue that the long evolution of China's reform era should in fact be dated from this 1861 Restoration. It is then that the Chinese Empire first allowed representatives of foreign governments to reside in the capital.
The first foreign ministry was established. As was a new office of foreign trade. A formidable program of military modernisation was also begun.
These reforms, like many subsequent efforts in both the Qing and the Republic of China, were thwarted by foreign incursion and local strife.
Chinese thinkers and writers like Gong Zizhen [1792-1841] had for years hoped for a change.
Gong famously wrote the lines:
I urge the Lord of Heaven
to shake us up anew,
Grant us human talent
not bound to a single kind.
I have observed elsewhere that despite this long evolution of reform and foreign engagement, it nonetheless remains unclear how a re-emergent China will set its course as a major global power, and how its role will shape the future international order. Nor is it clear what new goals - national, social and personal - the Chinese people will set themselves as a confident and prosperous modern member of the international community.
What is without doubt is the fact that we are in a period of extraordinary change. We can now with clarity look back to the eighteenth century, to the height of China's wealth and power during the reign of the Qianlong Emperor.
We can contemplate the humiliations visited on the Manchu government during the empire's decline in the nineteenth century. We can appreciate the efforts of the Republican revolutionaries who established China's first democracy, and who created an earlier "age of openness". We are mindful, too, of the impact of cruel invasion, of internecine conflict and the economic chaos that brought this era to an end.
We can also understand better the trajectory of the sixty years of the People's Republic, its trials and tribulations, the chaos of the Cultural Revolution followed by the era of stability and reform, and the historical lessons learnt from each that have brought China to where it is today.
I have mentioned two commemorations that will be marked in 2011.
But this year of 2010 also marks a major moment in China's past that will be recalled more painfully across the Chinese commentariat.
In October 2010, both in China and abroad, people will mark the destruction in 1860 of the Garden of Perfect Brightness (Yuanming Yuan) and the garden palaces at the foot of the Western Hills outside Beijing.
The Yuanming Yuan was the most magnificent garden-palace created in imperial China. It was a seat of government as well as a museum of imperial art for over a century. An Anglo-French force destroyed it to punish the Qing government for its failure to sign a treaty at the end of the Second Opium War. The devastation of the gardens, villas and palaces represents a shameful low point in the interaction between China and the West.
Today the ruins of the Western Palaces in the Garden of Perfect Brightness stand as China's national ruin, a sombre monument to the agonies of China's past.
But those agonies were also felt by some in the West.
In far-off Paris, the destruction of 1860 was decried by Victor Hugo, who wrote:
"One day two bandits entered the Summer Palace. One plundered, the other burned. ...We Europeans are the civilized ones, and for us the Chinese are the barbarians. This is what civilization has done to barbarism."
The events of 1860 form a critical part of understanding China today. They represent one of many narratives that impact on China's political and foreign policy consciousness.
But China's stories about its past are in fact made up of numerous overlapping and contrasting narratives.
They tell of past sufferings and injustices. They speak to our broad humanity. But they also express hope and the possibility of inspiring transformation.
We understand and appreciate China has many stories to tell. Not just one. Indeed, we in the rest of the world are witnesses to, as well as interested participants in, these many stories.
In its modern nationhood, China brings together these various views of its history, its present and its future. This includes China's view of itself as a proud and ancient nation.
A nation that draws upon rich and deep traditions. A nation that traces its written history back longer than any other.
Where the Chinese of today can draw on thousands of years of written history to understand their future place in the world. Drawing on the past, some in China today would still see their country as a victim.
Others may promote it as an exemplar.
Still others again would point to the fact that for 150 years China has sought to engage the West comprehensively - only to be rebuffed, exploited and at times invaded.
The question for both China and the West, is which (or what combination) of these narratives is most likely to prevail. China is of course not the only one asking these questions of itself.
There is great interest throughout the world as to what role China sees for itself in the future.
There is a hardline view that regards China's rise as a threat to the existing global order no matter what. There is a contrary view, espoused by some particularly in the developing world and in some parts of academia, that a new "Beijing consensus" should replace the "Washington consensus" with China the model for developing countries to follow. There is the associated view of China as the economic saviour of the world, emerging from the global financial crisis.
Or alternatively, there is the view that China increasingly behaves as a mercantilist power, insensitive to its emerging global economic responsibilities. The truth is there are as many conflicting views in the West about China and its future as there are within China itself.
But within this complexity we must recognise that there are certain core unassailable facts.
The change in China since the reform and opening era began in 1978 cannot be denied.
The figures tell the story.
First, after two decades of growth of around 10 per cent per year, China has become the second largest economy in the world. It is the world's largest exporter of manufactured goods, and the third largest exporter of all goods and services. It is also now the world's second-largest car market after the United States.
This year, in the aftermath of the worst global economic downturn since the Great Depression, China continues to be the principal engine of global economic recovery - a fact highlighted by the International Monetary Fund in recent days.
Only a decade ago, this would have been unimaginable.
Three decades ago, it would have been seen as sheer fantasy.
We have all been beneficiaries of China's remarkable performance. Perhaps what we do not understand so well, because we see less of it directly, is the enormous benefits this change has also brought to China.
Second, within thirty years China has transformed itself from being an impoverished, isolated and predominantly agrarian economy to become an increasingly global, wealthy, industrial and urban-centred economy. In the process, around 500 million people have been lifted out of poverty.
This is unprecedented.
Nearly half of China's population now live in urban centres, including around 150 cities that number more than 1 million people. China now has more internet users than the United States, including some 200 million bloggers. It has over 700 million mobile phone users. Over the past decade outbound Chinese tourist departures have grown five-fold to reach 47 million last year.
These figures tell of a nation in a period of great change.
Third, China's military modernisation has been rapid, as observers of the 60th anniversary parade would have noted. There have been profound changes in China's foreign policy behaviour in recent times as China's power, real and perceived, has grown.
The depth and breadth of China's transformation must be acknowledged. But so too must the fact that change is ongoing, and so too are its consequences.
China has benefitted remarkably from its policies of domestic economic reform and global economic engagement. But there is still an ongoing debate within China itself about that reform.
Will it continue to unleash the creative potential of the Chinese people?
Or are the urges to re-centralise control again coming into play - as some analysts argue, citing examples of how the state is now reasserting its role in the Chinese private economy.
China's friends also continue to have concerns about the handling of human rights in China. We want to see the development of a truly transparent and independent legal system in China. We want to see the economic system develop in a way that brings China and the Chinese people into a globalised world economy. These facts and the question of China's future matter to us because China is now an integral part of the international system.
A growing China will pursue its interests globally: that is natural.
And I believe that China recognises its own fundamental interest in working with - not against - the international system that has served China so well in recent decades.
Over the past 60 years or so, this system has entrenched the values, rules, conventions and foundations that have helped bring about the greatest prosperity that China has experienced in its history. As I have already noted, China has benefitted enormously from this international order. Increasingly China is also playing its part within this order.
We see this in China's role in the G20.
China has partnered with the other major economies in responding to the global economic crisis. China is also working with us to secure the conclusion of an ambitious WTO Doha Round - which would provide a timely impetus to global growth. China has also engaged deeply with the nations of the Asia-Pacific region. While the region is largely at peace and on a positive trajectory, we cannot take this for granted.
We need to actively shape our regional future, and lay the foundations for dealing with future challenges.
And I am pleased that China too shares this goal.
I shall continue to advocate the development of regional architecture that has the right membership and mandate to address the full spectrum of challenges confronting the region - economic, political and security. That membership must, of course, include China, just as it must include the United States, ASEAN at its core and other key nations of the region - Australia, India, Japan, New Zealand, the Republic of Korea, and Russia. The inclusion of the United States and Russia in our region's emerging architecture is fundamental to the evolution of what I call an Asia-Pacific community. In fact, so much of Australia's diplomacy has been driven by this core concern - how to integrate in particular the role of the United States in the future broad architecture of our region.
In this context I welcome very much the decision of ASEAN leaders at their summit in Hanoi on 8-9 April this year to encourage the United States and Russia to deepen their engagement in evolving regional architecture.
From Australia's perspective, an enhanced regional architecture involving both China and the United States is critical to our region's future and China's future role in it. While the countries of the region will need to settle how reformed regional architecture might be constituted, the ASEAN Summit outcome offers a critical step forward to the architecture our region needs for the long-term future. China is also increasingly active in the United Nations system.
China participated too in the Copenhagen negotiations last year - and there has been much commentary on the nature of China's contribution during the critical conference on climate change. China has since associated itself with the Copenhagen Accord.
But now, as the world's largest greenhouse gas emitter, and commensurate with its global role and influence, China must take on a greater leadership role on climate change. As an emerging power, China must take more responsibility to forge the solutions to the global challenges we face. This is as necessary for China's future national interests as it is for the interests of the rest of the world.
China's contribution to the world order is undeniable.
But there is much, much more to be done.
It does not help, for example, that China associates with regimes around the world that others seek to isolate because of their assault on the integrity of international system - from the Sudan to Burma. China can - and should - do more to support wider international efforts against destabilising regimes and on global security challenges such as Afghanistan and Iran. China is going through a period of immense change, the ramifications of which are being felt around the world. The international community shares a strong interest in maintaining a stable global order that fosters growing prosperity based on cooperation between nations.
China is already a major stakeholder in the current global order.
What the world would welcome is China engaging across the board as major global stakeholder in the maintenance and enhancement of that stable, rules-based order in the future.
Good for China.
And good for the world.
But to understand what role China will, can and must play in shaping this world order, we need to understand China more deeply and engage with China at all levels. As we enter the second decade of the 21st century, China's role in the world is being reappraised. On the international stage, China has in many respects emerged stronger in the aftermath of the global financial crisis and the global recession. More engaged with the international community. More valued as a major force in the global economy. And more important as the world addresses the challenges of the future - most particularly climate change.
Australia too must also continue to assess and reassess its own understanding of China, as China's reality changes.
I believe it is time for what the Australian National University's Professor Geremie Barmé has described as a "New Sinology" (Hou Hanxue).
That is, a Sinology or study of China that is mindful of the positive traditions of exchange and learning with China, from the time of Matteo Ricci in the 16th century, through the time of George E. Morrison and C.P. Fitzgerald to the present day. A New Sinology that inherits the positive legacy of understanding and engagement that enlivened so many people who were drawn to the study of China in the past. A Sinology that engages with the Sinosphere and a vibrant and energetic contemporary China - in all its dimensions.
As Geremie Barmé has written, a New Sinology advocates:
"a robust engagement with contemporary China and indeed with the Sinophone world in all of its complexity, be it local, regional or global... "
A New Sinology is not based on old theories. It is about engaging with a re-emergent China. It says that China should not simply be viewed as a threat. Nor should this New Sinology be based on a reticence towards speaking honestly or critically about today's China, for fear of causing offence.
Instead we seek a new balance.
One that goes beyond old Cold War concepts of fan-Hua or qin-Hua - that is, of either being anti-China or pro-China - as if we are eternally locked into a binary world. This is about a more sophisticated way of understanding today's China.
A New Sinology capable of opening up new ways of understanding this great and ancient civilisation, and what it might offer again in the future. The challenge for us all is how we move forward to promote a deeper, textured understanding of the China in the 21st century. Both a China that encourages us all, as well a China that from time to time causes us to ask ourselves where China is going. In April 2008, when speaking at Peking University, I talked about Australia's evolving relationship with China and the maturing of our friendship in this new era.
As I said:
"In the modern, globalised world, we are all connected; connected not only by politics and economics, but also in the air we breathe.
A true friend is one who can be a zhengyou, that is a partner who sees beyond immediate benefit to the broader and firm basis for continuing, profound and sincere friendship.In other words, a true friendship which 'offers unflinching advice and counsels restraint' to engage in principled dialogue about matters of contention. It is the kind of friendship that I know is treasured in China's political tradition."
The bedrock of this true friendship is trust and commitment. I believe that since the Whitlam Labor government normalised relations with the People's Republic of China in 1972, Australia has established and built on just such a trust.
A long-term nation-to-nation relationship evolves on the basis of shared interests and mutual benefit. It should also grow and prosper in an atmosphere of increasing respect, deepening understanding and a recognition of values.
I have spoken of zhengyou because I feel we need to be able to speak to the government of China, its media and its peoples in a frank manner.
I believe that those engaged with the Chinese world will be respected both for what they bring materially to the relationship, but also for what they represent in their own right.
In Australia, we are an open society. The consensus by which we govern ourselves is forged through political conflict, conversation and conciliation - and resolved through the ballot box. We in politics live in the scrimmage of media exposure, and we have various tiers of democratically elected government. Like our colleagues in China, we are conditioned by our history, answerable to our environment, and constrained by our realities.
For us in Australia, our history, our values and our alliances are part of who we are. Our commitment to a positive, forward-looking and mutually beneficial relationship with the People's Republic and the Chinese world has been tested and proven over time. We believe that it is on that basis that we can progress.
I do not think that every time we express ourselves on the basis of our values and beliefs that our core friendship towards China should be called into question.
I would question a view that regards honesty and well-intentioned comment as being 'anti-China' (fan-Hua), just as I reject the careless application of the expression 'un-Australian' here at home.
I promote the concept of zhengyou so we can develop the language and the demeanour for a more sophisticated way of talking to and about each other.
We have long ago moved beyond the Cold War. I am of the view that the binary language of that era - that is, of either being anti-China or pro-China without any form of nuance, also belongs in the past. I believe this is as much an important new principle for the collective West as it is an important principle for China herself.
Otherwise, the dialogue among us all will forever be trapped in a frustrating and unproductive cycle of offence, high dudgeon and mutual recrimination.
In the past the great Chinese writer Lu Xun satirised those writers who tried to sound elevated and self-important by using fashionable foreign expressions, which simply resulted in pretentious and tortured prose. He called it "foreign eight-legged essays" (yang bagu) - referring to the formulaic essays demanded of the imperial examiners in the past, the bagu wen.
In 1942, Mao Zedong, chairman of the Chinese Communist Party, warned his colleagues against creating a new dang bagu, or "Party eight-legged essay" - a form of writing that struck a pose merely to intimidate and obfuscate. Perhaps we too often are caught up in what I would call "the eight-legged essays of international relations", waijiao bagu.
That is, stereotypical responses to complex realities.
Simplistic knee-jerk reactions to situations that require a more layered response. In the great Australian tradition, it's time that we all got over it.
Otherwise our engagement runs the risk of being formalistic and lacking the elements of a mature and genuine relationship that is necessary as we negotiate the shoals of the future. It runs the risk of concealing beneath it a range of tensions (both real and imagined) which cannot be resolved if they are not the subject of substantive discussion.
Let us remember that we are now seeing the rise of a new great power alongside the continuing single existing superpower the United States.
In this context, genuine engagement becomes critically necessary. History is not overburdened with examples of how such transitions in geopolitical and geo-economic realities have been accommodated peacefully. We need a new way forward.
And that is as important both for both the academy and policymakers themselves - as the first often as one shapes the conceptual framework of the second.
The same applies for Australia and our own engagement with China. Consider the events of the past year.
2009 brought a number of tensions to our bilateral relationship.
First, there was controversy surrounding the failed Chinalco bid for Rio Tinto in June. Then, in July, the Australian Chinese businessman Stern Hu was arrested in Shanghai. In August, Rebiya Kadeer visited the Melbourne Film Festival.
During those months, our processes, our views - be they official or popular - were frank and forthright. The boisterous environment of our democracy and the media were on display for all to see. We appreciate fully the core interests of the People's Republic of China, in particular with regard to its territorial integrity. But we too have core interests and core values that do not change over time. The interests of both our nations and our peoples must form the basis of the evolving dialogue between us.
Australia's engagement with, and serious study of, China is not a recent phenomenon. It has been a strong part of our heritage, as this lecture series amply demonstrates. But this does not mean that it is yet a strong or rich enough part of our national dialogue. As a country we need a focused training of expertise in 360-degree 'China literacy'.
Today, I am announcing how the Australian Government intends to encourage and deepen such China literacy in our principal academic institutions.
To develop a New Sinology, we must take scholars, experts and policymakers out of the silos of separate academic disciplines and departments. We need to foster a new degree of collaboration and engagement between scholars and practitioners of different backgrounds and expertise. And to do that, I believe we need to establish a new centre for study, learning and the exchange of ideas and understanding. A place where scholars, thinkers and policy specialists can engage in an across-the-board approach that brings history, culture, literature, philosophy and cultural studies perspectives into active engagement with those working on public policy, the environment, social change, economics, trade, foreign policy, defence policy and strategic analysis.
I can think of no better place than the Australian National University to further the sophisticated research and dialogue on China's engagement with Australia, our region and globally.
Nationally and internationally, the ANU is uniquely placed to build on its China-related expertise through a vibrant sustainable program of integrated research, education, training and public engagement - as well as its valuable library resources accumulated over the decades, going back to C.P. FitzGerald's time.
Therefore, it is with great pleasure that today I announce the establishment of the Australian Centre on China in the World.
Or, as we are calling it in Chinese, Zhonghua Quanqiu Yanjiu Zhongxin. The Australian Centre on China in the World will enhance the ANU's existing capabilities to create an integrated, world-leading institution for Chinese Studies.
The Centre will be a hub for national and international scholars. It will also be linked virtually with other university centres with related expertise both at home and abroad.
The Australian Government's aspiration is to make this centre the pre-eminent global institution for the integrated understanding of contemporary China in all its dimensions - and for the study of contemporary China's regional and global engagement.
In Australia, we have a deep national interest in becoming the unparalleled repository of this expertise. But there is also I believe a wider global interest in this being the case as well, given our longstanding links with European, American and Chinese scholarship in this area.
In short, the Government's intention is to build over time the global go-to place for the analysis of the continued rise of China in all of its complexity - domestic and international - employing an integrated and multidisciplinary approach. It will conduct leading-edge and innovative research on China, develop new generations of scholars with deep expertise in China and build awareness - both within Australia and internationally - of China and its role in the world. Involving outstanding thinkers and researchers in China, our region, North America and Europe is key to the new Centre's brief. Through this initiative we will help foster and support future generations of intellectual, cultural and political leadership and provide new and creative research opportunities and training. We also expect that the business and philanthropic community will see the value in this Centre and contribute to the foundation that will support it, in partnership with the Government's initial investment.
This initiative is to be far more than just a resource for government and academics.
A new building will also be designed to house the Centre, which will be both a modern academic centre and a focal point for the university.
The Australian Centre on China in the World will foster research and educational links with other Australian institutions and increase our national capacity to provide research, outreach, postgraduate and other training activities dedicated to an informed and mature consideration of China. This study of China, and the teaching about China is not only about China and the World, it relates profoundly to China in the World. It is about research and thinking about China in the larger context of history as well as in relation to our Australian world, our region - Asia and the Pacific - as well as in the context of it as a multi-faceted global presence.
It is about a China that through trade and economics, foreign policy and defence policy, history and culture, ideas and beliefs, language and literature is part of the major conversations and debates unfolding in the global environment in which we live, think and continue to hope and prosper.
It is about a China whose role is crucial whether we talk about economic growth, or climate change, regional security or international politics.
At the same time, the mentoring of people in the public sector and providing access to a broader community of outstanding scholars, practitioners and the media are crucial to the mission of the new Centre. We need not only to expand high-level dialogue about China between academics, policy-makers and senior business people. We must also seek to enhance understanding of China at all levels of Australian society.
And that is part of the mission for the new Centre. To contribute to a well-informed debate that engages the broader Australian population in a dialogue that directly concerns their future.
In establishing this new centre, we are building on a legacy of decades of Australian scholarship and broader academic, economic, cultural and political engagement with China. And that robust engagement must continue with the China of our times. Not shying away from controversy. But always seeking deeper knowledge, and where possible, common understanding.
And all in a new tradition of a New Sinology anchored in the principle of zhengyou.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
Today is the eve of ANZAC Day, when we commemorate those who served the nation in conflict.
On ANZAC Day we remember too that national security for Australians has long meant international action.
We have known since before Federation that events around the globe can and do have a direct impact on our nation.
And in the 21st century, that is the case more than ever.
Ladies and gentlemen, there is no greater responsibility for government than that of national security.
The defence of our nation, the protection of our people, the upholding of the values which we live by and the interests which we hold dear - these are paramount.
This has been a sacred trust between all our governments and the Australian people throughout our history.
On the eve of ANZAC day, we remember this as we honour those who have served and are serving today the defence of Australia - over 3000 ADF personnel around the world. 
And we also honour our police, our diplomats and so many other dedicated officials employed in the service of our nation's security both at home and abroad.
We salute their service, and their families who stand rock-solid beside them as they stand rock-solid for Australia. We respect their commitment. We pay special tribute to those who have fallen in the defence of our land. We salute their sacrifice.
Their sacrifice reminds us afresh of our responsibility to ensure we have the capabilities to deal with the vast array of security challenges that lie ahead.
In 2008, I outlined in Parliament the ever more complex and inter-connected dimensions of our National Security environment in the first ever national security statement to the Australian Parliament by any Australian Government.
From dealing with traditional defence and diplomatic challenges, to emerging security challenges such as the persistent threat of terrorism, the evils of people smuggling, organised crime, cyber security, the perils of natural disasters, pandemics and the emerging threat of climate change.
Since then, we have been hard at work in building the right policy framework for a comprehensive approach to the increasingly dynamic and interconnected dimensions of our national security.
In 2009, we ended a decade long gap in the comprehensive review of Australia's national defence.
The Defence White Paper provides a blueprint for our defence capabilities in the context of an increasingly demanding strategic environment, where we need a force that is capable of meeting the demands of the defence of Australia, the needs of current operations, while also being able to make a contribution to a wide range of potential contingencies in our immediate region, the Asia Pacific and globally.
It represents the most powerful, integrated and sophisticated set of military capabilities that our nation has ever acquired. It will ensure that the Australian Defence Force has the reach, weight and capabilities to meet the national security challenges of the future.
It creates the pathway for the development of Force 2030 - a major step up in Australia's military preparedness, and most potent range of capabilities Australia has ever held.
We have committed to 3 per cent real growth in the Defence budget to 2017-18, and to over 2 per cent out to 2030.
Importantly, the Defence White Paper also introduces stringent financial disciplines on Defence, including a substantial savings program to maximise efficiencies and the return on the taxpayer's investment. This is the most comprehensive and coherent approach to our defence forces in a generation.
But the defence effort is only one side of the coin. How Australia manages its diplomacy, and in particular its key diplomatic relationships is also critical.
On this front, the government has also been active.
We are at the dawn of the Asia-Pacific century. Our relationships with the major powers in our region, and the relationships of these powers with one another, will determine the strategic environment in which we operate.
Of these, our alliance with the United States remains Australia's single most important security relationship. The strategic stability of our region will in large part depend on the continuing strong presence of the United States.
We have intensified our cooperation with President Obama's administration and are working closely together on any number of regional and global issues: from addressing the global economic crisis to matters of global security such as Iran and DPRK's nuclear programs, climate change and regional developments.
Japan is our closest partner in East Asia with whom we have strengthened our bilateral security cooperation.
We have co-hosted with Japan the International Commission on Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament, which is playing an influential role in the lead-up to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty Review Conference later this year. This is complemented by our Trilateral Strategic Dialogue with the United States.
We are in active negotiations with Japan on a Free Trade Agreement. And in forums such as APEC, the East Asia Summit and the G20, Australia and Japan work closely together.
We continue to strengthen our relationship with China.
China is Australia's largest trading partner and Australia has been working closely with China over the past year on critical global challenges such as the global financial crisis and regional economic integration.
Australia has also begun a high level strategic dialogue with China, in addition to engagement at the highest levels between our respective security establishments and defence forces.
Australia looks forward to deepening this dialogue with Beijing in the future - and expanding new areas of security cooperation with China and our other friends and partners in the region.
At the same time, India and Australia have now designated the relationship as a strategic partnership.
This is a recognition by both countries of the growing breadth and depth of our relations and our ability to prosecute shared strategic perspectives, something this government has worked hard to achieve.
India is a major power with a widening strategic influence. Australia looks forward to the unfolding security engagement between our two countries as the Indian Ocean is increasingly a region of vital strategic interest.
Australia and Indonesia have also now designated their relationship as one of strategic partnership. President Yudhoyono's recent visit to Australia and historic address to the Australian Parliament symbolises the added strength we have brought to this vital relationship. 
The President captured it best in his address to Parliament when he said: "Australia and Indonesia have a great future together. We are not just neighbours. We are not just friends. We are strategic partners".
As with our defence, our key strategic relationships are in good order; and strengthening.
This government will continue to work these relationships to enhance regional security for us all. The government is also committed to building architecture beyond country relationships to bolster our wider security.
This is at the heart of the Government's initiative for an Asia-Pacific community. 
The shifting of global strategic and economic weight to the Asia-Pacific is changing the strategic calculus of our region. We need to anticipate and manage this challenge.
Regional dynamism and growth, coupled with Asia's history, are likely to generate new challenges and exacerbate existing tensions. While the region is largely at peace and on a positive trajectory, we cannot take this for granted.
We need to actively shape our regional future, and lay the foundations for dealing with future challenges. We need to continue to foster regional habits of cooperation.
This is why the Government has advocated the development of regional architecture that has the right membership and mandate to address the full spectrum of challenges confronting the region - economic, political and security. That architecture must have ASEAN at its core, and include other key nations of the region - the US, China, Japan, the Republic of Korea, India, New Zealand, Australia and Russia. The inclusion of the United States and Russia in our region's emerging architecture is fundamental to the evolution of what I call an Asia-Pacific community. In fact, much of Australia's diplomacy has been driven by this core concern - how to integrate in particular the role of the United States in the future broad architecture of our region.
In this context I welcome very much the decision of ASEAN leaders at their summit in Hanoi on 8-9 April this year to encourage the United States and Russia to deepen their engagement in evolving regional architecture.
While the countries of the region will need to settle how reformed regional architecture might be constituted, the ASEAN Summit outcome offers a critical step forward to the architecture that our region needs for the long-term future. It is also in pursuit of Australia's interests that the Government is seeking a non-permanent seat on the UN Security Council in 2013-14.
The Security Council is the key decision-making forum of the United Nations. It is the pre-eminent body dealing with international security. It deliberates on matters of war and peace. Its mission is to uphold the global, rules-based order of which we are all beneficiaries.
Australia has a big stake in the decisions of the UNSC.
It is already a quarter of a century since Australia was a member of the UNSC. Securing this seat is by no means assured given that Australia entered the field later than most others, given the previous Australian Government's decision not to contest.
Nonetheless, ours is a vigorous candidacy because we believe we have a real contribution to make.
We have long contributed to peace-building in many of the world's trouble spots, including current deployments in Afghanistan, East Timor, Solomon Islands, Sudan, and the Sinai.
Australia has unimpeachable non-proliferation credentials and is widely recognised as a leader in this field, including through our role in the Nuclear Suppliers Group and, more recently, through the initiative to establish the International Commission for Nuclear Non-proliferation and Disarmament (ICCND).
Over the years, we have been creative contributors to regional and global security - from our role in the independence of East Timor to the Cambodia peace plan; from our key role in finalising the Chemical Weapons Convention to our continuing role in the security of the Solomon Islands.
Opponents of Australia playing an active and assertive role in the councils of the world sell this country short.
Australia has a global contribution to make as recognised by successive Australian governments of all political persuasions since 1945.
Although remarkably that seems to have changed in recent years for reasons which have nothing to do with the national interest. Opponents of Australia's active role in global affairs have a "small Australia" mindset.
This mindset would never have got us a seat at what has now become the world's premier global economic decision-making body, the G20.
We were not assured a seat at this table.
But through the force of Australia's ideas and advocacy, we secured the G20 as the right global grouping, and are now working with the other 19 largest economies in the world to build a sustainable global economic recovery after the worst crisis since the Great Depression.
This is a significant achievement. The success of the G20 in stabilising the global economy has been to the benefit of all Australians. And the securing of a seat for Australia at the world's top table for economic governance will be to the lasting benefit of our national interest - whoever constitutes the future government of Australia in decades to come.
The great challenges of managing complex geo-strategic systems and relations between states will not go away. But security is no longer something that can be defended only at our borders and beyond.
As I made clear in my address to Parliament on national security in 2008, responsible governments must also face up to the reality of a new global security environment, and emerging threats.
Non-traditional national security challenges are rapidly becoming the norm, rather than the exception.
The terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001 on the United States brought starkly to attention the rise of a global violent jihadist movement that has gone on to carry out or inspire attacks elsewhere.
September 11 may now seem to some a long time ago. My message to the Australian public is simple - the terrorist threat at home and abroad is increasing, not decreasing. And the fact that to date we have not had a repeat of the carnage of the magnitude we saw on September 11 is a tribute to the skill and professionalism of all of our security agencies.
Nonetheless, the December 25 incident in the US demonstrates the fundamental importance of absolute vigilance.
Today's highly inter-connected, mobile and technology-dependent world has blurred the classical distinctions between foreign and domestic, between state and non-state security threats. It has also meant that interconnected systems and growing interdependencies, fed by ever faster and cheaper technology, is increasing our vulnerability to disruption.
Computer hackers in internet cafes can penetrate national security systems and steal commercial secrets. Virtual Imams can recruit suicide bombers off the net. And viruses can spread from a chicken farm in China to infect cities across the world with the speed of an A380.
The breadth of the challenge we face to national security has never been greater. At the top of the list, terrorism has become a persistent and permanent feature of Australia's security environment.
The threat is real and enduring. It is two-fold in nature, emerging both from the global violent jihadist movement itself, and from locally-generated but globally-inspired radicals.
The government released earlier this year the Counter-Terrorism White Paper, the first since 2004 and the first to bring together the domestic and international elements of our policy approach. This involves multiple government agencies and all levels of federal, state and local government.
Domestically we are improving our intelligence and analysis, strengthening our protective measures, and building resilience.
As part of an integrated effort we are establishing a Counter-Terrorism Control Centre to ensure a seamless flow of information for action across government.
Internationally we are working with close friends and partners, such as Indonesia, to strengthen intelligence and law enforcement collaboration and create an international environment that is hostile to terrorism. These are determined efforts to address the threat of terrorism.
But as the White Paper makes clear, the threat is serious and enduring. The government can take measures to reduce the risk of a terrorist attack, but it cannot eliminate that risk.
Another attack on Australia, our people or our interests could happen at any time. Our intelligence is good, and our intelligence, police and security professionals are doing highly professional job.
But the nature of the murky world of terrorists is that their aims and plans are hidden. Under these circumstances, there is no room for complacency.
It is this analysis that galvanises Australia's national interest in our continuing commitment in Afghanistan. Australia's interest is to prevent Afghanistan from once again becoming a haven for terrorists; to prevent Afghanistan becoming a launching pad for attacks against us.
It is fitting to consider amidst these halls of learning, freedom and tolerance that those we are up against in Afghanistan would tear the institutions down.
The operations of the international coalition in Afghanistan are at a critical point in time.
It is a time when there is a real opportunity to make real inroads against the Taliban and their Al Qaeda supporters, to make space for the government of Afghanistan to build national support, and to ready the Afghan forces for the responsibility of the security of their country.
This is why last year we made the difficult decision to increase our troop commitment by around 40 per cent to 1550 troops in support of a strategy for success. Australia strongly supports the new US-led strategy for the international coalition in Afghanistan.
This strategy is based on a sophisticated combination of military and civilian effort to ensure that the government of Afghanistan can increasingly step up to its responsibilities for security and governance.
The focus of our military effort is on training Afghan troops in Oruzgan province so that they can provide their own security.
And on this, let me be clear. We will not keep our troops in Afghanistan one day longer than that necessary to enable this transition.
The ADF in Oruzgan has mentored the Afghan National Army 4th Brigade's headquarters, a 400 man infantry kandak, and elements of the Brigade's combat and logistics support kandaks. The ADF will continue this mentoring task and plans to take on the mentoring of the remainder of the ANA 4th Brigade by the end of 2010.
Our core mission in Afghanistan is on track. But there is more to be done.
As part of our support for President Obama's strategy, late last year I foreshadowed an increase in our civilian commitment in Afghanistan.
This important civilian work is something that I have witnessed on the ground in Afghanistan. 
It is work that all Australians would be proud of. 
This increase will comprise additional diplomatic, development assistance and policing support.
This will see roughly a doubling of our diplomatic and aid effort to strengthen our capacity to understand and influence developments on the ground and to build the capacity of the government of Afghanistan.
Like our military contribution, this enhanced civilian contribution will be focussed in Oruzgan province, to complement the good work being done by the ADF in building roads and bridges and rebuilding schools.
Our increased policing effort is targeted at strengthening our ability to train the Afghan National Police so that they too can increasingly assume greater responsibility for their own law and order needs and allow us to transfer that responsibility.
Our civilian increase will amount to around 50 per cent more than our existing contribution and will be a force-multiplier for our total effort in Afghanistan.
It will enhance our capacity to prosecute our strategy with international partners and to promote our interests with the Afghan government. In this, we will continue to make it clear to the government of Afghanistan that we expect them to meet their responsibilities.
More effective civilian-military integration of all the elements of our contribution in Afghanistan will ensure that we are all pulling together and in the same direction for success.
This approach is consistent with General McChrystal's strategy for Afghanistan which is based on the time-honoured truth that military effort alone will not deliver success in conflicts like this. Unless we are using and coordinating all instruments of national power, we will be less effective.
This is serious work. It involves hard yards. It is dangerous. There have been Australian casualties in this effort. We can expect that there will be more in the future.
But it is necessary work.
And it is work that we do with our closest ally - the United States.
The strength of our alliance with the United States is founded on our bearing the burden of security together. This is fundamental. As the largest non-NATO military contribution to Afghanistan, we are fulfilling that fundamental responsibility. And Australia has never walked away from the United States in times of need. We will not now.
Australia's military commitment to Afghanistan and the conditions attached to it have been the product of detailed deliberations of the National Security Committee of the Cabinet.
This work has been led by the Defence Minister John Faulkner.
It involves detailed, delicate and diplomatic work - because the Government remains acutely aware that our decisions involve the lives of one and a half thousand of our men and women in uniform on the ground today.
This work has been carefully calibrated with our friends and allies.
That is why the Government finds the contribution to this debate on Afghanistan by the Leader of the Opposition yesterday characteristically reckless.
The Leader of the Opposition has said Australia should now lead the military operations in Oruzgan given the recent decisions by the Dutch Government.
To be clear, such a decision would probably require the further deployment of an additional thousand or more troops to Afghanistan.
To be clear, such a deployment would cost the Australia taxpayer in the order of a further 1 billion dollars per year.
Once again we have an example of erratic policy making on the run; this time on national security.
When I delivered the first National Security Statement to Parliament in December 2008, I made the point that in an increasingly complex and interconnected security environment, we needed a more integrated national security structure that enhanced national security policy coordination and implementation.
Since that time, we've made considerable strides towards a more integrated, whole-of-government approach to national security, one that moves seamlessly from domestic to international, from traditional to non-traditional, and that is agile and responsive to today's dynamic and fast-paced security environment.
We have created the position of a National Security Adviser.
This position has developed and supported whole-of-government national security policy development and crisis response.
It is building a genuine national security community. We cannot afford the stove-piping which has traditionally characterised our security agencies.
The strands of national security effort - foreign and domestic, defence and diplomacy, policy and intelligence, federal and state - are now better coordinated. But more needs to be done.
Whether it was responding to the Black Saturday bushfires in Victoria or the tsunami that struck Samoa and Tonga, the National Security Adviser has been at the centre, driving our response across government. It has also been the case in the development of the government's policy on critical strategic and foreign policy challenges such as Afghanistan and cyber security, including the Government's new cyber security strategy.
We are also working towards a coordinated budget process across the entire national security community.
This year, as part of the Budget process, the government has brought together all of the national security-related proposals from relevant agencies under one umbrella. This has allowed us to weigh options and shift resources within and between portfolios to best achieve our national security priorities.
We have also learnt through experience, in responding to disasters and conflicts in our region, that we are at our most effective when we are able to draw on all elements of our national power, military and civilian.
The Australian Defence Force, whilst indispensable and invaluable, cannot be the sum total of our effort.
So we are creating a civilian response corps to enable the rapid deployment of Australian civilians into overseas disaster or conflict zones.
An Office of the Australian Civilian Corps has been established within AusAID to implement the initiative, and create a register of Australians with valuable skill sets who can be deployed overseas at short notice to respond to crises.
It should have an interim capability by mid-2010, and be fully operational in early 2011.
In addition, we have created the Asia-Pacific Civil-Military Centre of Excellence. 
Australia has a long and proud record of contributing to peace and stabilisation operations, and to disaster management overseas.
The Centre is designed to capitalise on our expertise and support the development of improved national civil-military capabilities to prevent and respond more effectively to conflict and disasters overseas.
We have also established a National Intelligence Coordination Committee, chaired by the National Security Adviser, to ensure our national intelligence effort is effectively integrated and aligned with our national security priorities.
Of course an important foundation for a functioning national security community is effective information sharing. We know from experience that the consequences of not sharing the right information with the right people at the right time can be catastrophic.
We needed to work together on this to improve our efforts as a national security community.
That is why the Government has supported the community's proposal for the National Security Information Environment Roadmap: 2020.
This Roadmap provides for the first time a single strategy to address the many barriers to information sharing.
It challenges some outdated notions of information 'stovepipes', and provides a clear vision of where we want to go with information sharing across the national security community over the next decade. It is aimed at ensuring that the right information can get to the right people at the right time. In all questions of national security, information and its effective dissemination is critical to all actions taken on the ground.
Today, I am pleased to formally open the National Security College.
This is an important day for Australia.
This will become a central institution in shaping the future of our national security policy, personnel and collaborative culture. It will prove to be one of the most significant and enduring foundation stones of our new, emerging national security community.
Because from it will emerge the national security practitioners, and the culture of community and collaboration, essential if Australia is to meet the security challenges of the 21st century.
The College will strengthen the ability of national security leaders to analyse Australia's strategic environment and the dynamics of change within it, and to recognise and respond to threats.
Its courses and other activities, such as the College's outreach program, will help to build trusted networks of interaction between governments at all levels, businesses, academia and community organisations.
We will include in the College participants from regional countries, building our links with national security practitioners in our neighbourhood. In this sense it is also a useful confidence and security building measure.
Its multi-disciplinary approach and whole-of-government research projects will help to identify new and emerging security threats and effective counter-measures.
It will help break down any remaining silos in our national security community.
It will promote new ways of conceiving of security threats, and new ways of addressing them.
It will build up expertise across government. And it will foster a new national security culture.
We need a national security community and culture that has a common conceptual framework, a common language, rather than the different dialects that often unnecessarily separate our defence, foreign policy, intelligence and wider security community.
I am not suggesting that core specialist, disciplinary skills should be substituted for an amorphous set of national security concepts. In fact, quite the reverse.
The specialist training of our defence force, our diplomats and intelligence community must constantly improve in order to remain among the best in the world.
I am talking about a further set of skills that should become an essential pre-requisite for the future leaders of our national security community.
To be blunt, it will be essential for all future candidates to the Senior Executive Service or equivalent positions across our national security community to graduate from an additional specialist national security course here at this College before advancing to future leadership positions.
That is why I have said this new National Security College of Australia will become central to the shape of the Australian national security community.
And that is why this is an important day for the nation.
The College will receive up to $17.3 million over four years to assist with its establishment.
In addition, a new building will also be constructed for the College here at the ANU, likely to open around the end of 2012.
I'm very pleased that Michael L'Estrange, an experienced diplomat with outstanding skills in public policy, will be leading the College.
There is no better place for the College to be placed than here at the Australian National University.
To conclude, this government stands for the strongest national security for Australia.
We stand for strong defence. We stand four-square behind the US alliance.
We stand committed to forging our key relationships in our region.
We stand for the long haul fight against terrorism both at home and abroad.
We stand for a comprehensive, coherent and well coordinated national security policy that uses all instruments of national power to meet contemporary national security challenges of Australia.
And that is why the inauguration of this new National Security College is an important day for the nation.
Thank you.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
All nations are shaped by their histories, their memories and their stories.
By their triumphs, by their tragedies.
By their myths and by their legends.
Because together, these are the things that shape a nation's soul.
And how a nation remembers its past animates how that same nation sees its future.
Often in ways of which they may be barely aware.
For Australia, our identity has been etched deeply by what we call ANZAC.
For nearly a century, in fact for most of our federated history, ANZAC has occupied a sacred place not far from the nation's soul.
It shapes deeply our nation's memory. It shapes deeply how we see the world.
A hundred years later, it shapes too what we do in the world.
Neither religious nor secular, whatever our beliefs are, ANZAC is profoundly spiritual - inspiring pilgrimages still to that far-off place where our modern-day pilgrims drink deep from the well of national memory.
So what is this legend that we call ANZAC? How has it shaped our nation's life?
How does if offer quiet counsel and gentle direction as we seek to chart our future?
And how do we best nurture its flame for another century as we approach the first centenary of the ANZAC landings?
I believe each generation of Australians has a duty to pass this torch to the next.
So what is the story of ANZAC? And how do its values speak to us today?
Values of courage - courage of the type we saw in the murderous assault on Lone Pine.
Values of sacrifice - sacrifice that saw nearly 9000 Australians find their resting place today on Turkish soil.
Values of mateship - the almost biblical story of Simpson and his donkey.
Values of compassion - the decision of both the Australians and the Turks to lay down their arms for a day in order that both might bury their dead.
Values of a deeper humanity, as the Turks whom we first met in war have embraced us in peace - and the words of Ataturk (who saw no difference between our Johnnies and their Mehmets) speak to us still down the ages.
Courage, sacrifice, mateship, compassion and the bonds of our common humanity.
Good values. Important values. Values for a nation.
Yet values still of a broader and richer canvas than a narrow nationalism that simply lauds one people above another.
So how have these ANZAC values shaped our nation's life over the century?
We have become, by tradition, a nation that does not resile from a fight when fight we must.
We honour our men and women in uniform for there is no greater honour than to wear the uniform of Australia.
We stand up for our friends and for our allies and for the principles of international decency.
Yet the carnage of this war to end all wars (one in twenty-five of our entire population a casualty, one in eighty killed in action) has also made us warriors for peace.
No longer would we allow our soldiers to become mere cannon fodder for foreign generals. If fight we must, then all speed to action.
But as a nation we also strain every sinew for peace because there is no romance in the mud and the blood of war - only the cold silence of death and the sobbing of innocents.
ANZAC has taught us anew the wisdom of old - blessed are the peacemakers.
These then are good values.
Values that have become good traditions.
Values and traditions that have helped shape a good and decent people.
Values that do not allow us to remain silent when we see the underdog oppressed.
Values and traditions at work today from Afghanistan, to Timor, to the Solomons, to Sudan and the Sinai.
Values and traditions that unite millions who have served in uniform and the hundred thousand whose names lie etched in stone in this memorial.
So how then do we keep this flame alight for the century to come?
April 1915 is now beyond nearly all our living memory.
And as the ranks of those who march thin further over the years to come, how do we tend this flame with diligence and care for the generations to come?
I have the greatest confidence that it will tend itself.
But as we approach the century of the Gallipoli landings just five years from now, perhaps it is also time for a further national conversation as to how we commemorate and celebrate ANZAC in 2015.
One approach is for the government simply to announce a program of events.
As Prime Minister, I would like to do it differently.
In the year ahead, I would like to hear from the nation itself.
From the ground up. From every school. From every community. From every RSL.
Because if I've learned one thing in the time I've been Prime Minister, it is that all wisdom does not proceed from the nation's capital.
So let us instead listen to the wisdom of our people.
On how we should honour ANZAC on its centenary - a centenary which approaches faster than we may think.
To this end, the government will appoint a National Commission on the Commemoration of the ANZAC Centenary.
This Commission will be made up of former Prime Minister Bob Hawke, former Prime Minister Malcolm Fraser, together with the President of the RSL - Rear Admiral Ken Doolan.
They will be supported by the representatives of the Defence Forces, the National War Memorial and by the Minister for Veterans Affairs.
The task of the Commission will be to call forth submissions from across the nation on how we most appropriately mark this important centenary for the nation.
And then at year's end, to recommend to government what we should do.
Not just for the centenary of ANZAC itself - but also for the other great centenaries that lie ahead between ANZAC Day and Armistice Day.
Some have suggested enhancing this great war memorial with a new ANZAC Gallery.
Others point what can be done with other memorials around Australia.
Some have said we should enliven further our commemorations with new monuments abroad - for example, preserving the submarine the AE2 which spectacularly breached the narrows in 1915 to threaten the Turkish fleet in a spectacular display of seamanship.
Others still have said we should even raise the AE2.
Or find her sister ship, the AE1, which remains lost without trace with all hands off Rabaul to this day.
Many have pointed to a new generation of scholarships to further the ANZAC spirit through education and excellence.
These are just some possibilities - not all of which will come to pass.
There are in fact many besides.
Let our local communities begin the national conversation from the ground up to discuss what best should be done to honour ANZAC.
I believe the diggers would want it this way.
Yesterday together with my son I visited this Memorial.
I was taken by the letters home.
Testimony to the horror, testimony to heroism, and testimony also to humour in the face of humiliation and despair.
One man wrote of the horrors of trenches:
"God it is cruel. What humans will stand is astounding...Tonight will be another long vigil gazing into death, this is truly the Valley of the Shadow."
Another, a British officer, wrote in admiration of the heroism he saw in the ANZAC assault on Helles:
"They were at home in hell-fire...They laughed at it; they sang through it. Their pluck was titanic. They were not men but gods, demons infuriated. We saw them fall by the score. But what of it? Not for one breath did the great line waver or break. On and up it went, up and on, as steady and proud as if on parade. A seasoned staff officer watching choked up with his own admiration. Our men tore off their helmets and waved them, and poured cheer after cheer after those wonderful ANZACs."
All part of what we call ANZAC.
Courage, sacrifice, mateship, compassion and our common humanity.
Values for a nation.
For our federation, they were our first generation.
But at Gallipoli, many breathed their last.
Wars always end.
But our duty to remember never will.
Lest we forget. 


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
Thank you to ACCI for your assistance in organising this event. The Government enjoys a strong relationship with ACCI. We appreciate your robust contribution to the national economic debate and we've taken some good ideas from you - not least of which was the Investment Allowance for Business which helped support Australian businesses to grow and invest through the global recession.
Today we stand on the eve of two significant economic policy events. In three days time the Government will release the Independent Tax Review conducted by Ken Henry and his team and the Government's response to that review. In 12 days' time the Government will release its third budget, the last budget before we face the Australian people at an election.
Today, my purpose is not to pre-empt the government's tax and budget policies, but to provide some context around:
     * The economic challenges that motivate our policy agenda;
     * The economic opportunities we are reaching towards; and
     * The principles that have guided the Government as we have worked to develop our tax policy and budget package.
Over the last 18 months, Australians have faced one of the toughest global economic challenges in our lifetime. As we look back, I am proud of the success of Australia in navigating the global recession. It is a testament to the ability of the whole community - businesses, unions, workers and government - to pull together, and the strong and decisive leadership from government economic policy.
I am proud of the Government's economic stimulus strategy and the results it has produced. I am proud of the more than 200,000 jobs that Treasury estimates were saved by the stimulus. In fact, had we generated the same unemployment rate as America through this global recession, another half a million Australians would be out of work.
I am proud that so many Australian businesses kept running while so many millions shut up shop overseas. I am proud that Australia had the shallowest slowdown of all the advanced economies. I am proud of the fact that Australia was one of only two of the advanced economies not to go into recession, and I am proud that we emerged from this global recession with the lowest debt and deficit of all the major advanced economies and our AAA rating intact.
Australia has emerged from the global recession with one of the strongest economies in the developed world. This should be a reason to be confident. It should not be a cause for complacency.
Just as we worked hard to ensure our economy was the envy of the world during the downturn, we now must work hard to capitalise on this position as we move through the economic recovery phase and a return to economic growth.
That is the context for the Henry Review and the Budget. If we get these decisions right; take bold action to capitalise on our strong position, then I believe we can set Australia up for the next generation of prosperity.
First let me begin by describing the economic principles that have guided this Government's economic strategy over the last two and a half years. Since the government came to office, we have sought to build a strong economy, protect the jobs of working families and keep Australia out of recession. Through changing global economic conditions, the Government has applied two consistent principles of economic management:
     * Countercyclical macro-economic policy to maintain stability; and
     * Long-term microeconomic reform and investment to boost productivity and deliver sustainable growth for the future.
These are the two arms of the government's economic strategy, both for the past two years and for the future.
This Government's first two years have seen significant swings in global economic conditions from the inflationary boom of 2007, through the global slump of 2008, and towards the emerging dawn of a new era of growth following the worst global recession since the Great Depression. Through these cycles, the Government has maintained a conservative countercyclical fiscal policy: restraining public expenditure growth when the private economy is strong, and stepping in to protect jobs and businesses when the private economy is weak.
This policy approach guided our response to the boom conditions this government inherited two years ago. In 2007, the Australian economy was suffering from capacity constraints, inflation was rising to 16-year highs, and the Reserve Bank had delivered 12 consecutive interest rate rises.
The Government responded with fiscal discipline including savings of $33 billion over four years in our first budget and we invested in capacity building infrastructure and skills and enhanced the independence and transparency of monetary policy.
Global economic conditions changed rapidly and dramatically towards the end of 2008. Major developed economies fell one by one into recession. Global merchandise trade fell by around 40 per cent. Again, the government applied countercyclical fiscal policy to protect Australia from the global recession.
It took strong and decisive action to guarantee the banks and provide immediate support to the economy, including cash payments to support consumption, the trebling of the first-home owners' boost and an increased business tax break for private investment. As we implemented our economic stimulus plan, we were focussed on the urgent need to support the economy rapidly, and also kept one eye on the future needs of sustainable economic growth. That is why about 65 per cent of total direct investment under the nation-building for recovery strategy is investment in infrastructure.
As the IMF concluded: "The increase in public investment will continue to support activity in the near term, while addressing infrastructure shortfalls." 
Australia has the fastest growth, the second-lowest unemployment, the lowest debt and deficit when compared to the major advanced economies. As we emerge from the global recession, the government will continue to apply the same core economic principles.
Amid various short-term economic challenges, we have never lost sight of our core long-term economic strategy: to reform Australia's economy and build a platform for future growth. This strategy is based on our objective of improving Australia's long term productivity growth and participation rate. This long-term strategy is designed to address Australia's long term global and domestic economic challenges.
The recent fiscal troubles in Greece underline the ongoing legacy of the global recession. The downgrade yesterday of Greece's sovereign debt has sent shockwaves through the global financial system, reminding us once again that global financial markets are increasingly interconnected.
While Greece's fiscal position has attracted significant international attention, fiscal sustainability has become a significant risk in several advanced economies:
     * In the United States, the budget deficit in 2009 was 12.5 per cent of GDP.
     * In the United Kingdom, the budget deficit last year was nearly 11 per cent of GDP.
     * In Japan it was more than 10 per cent of GDP.
     * By contrast, MYEFO forecast Australia's deficit to peak at 4.5 per cent of GDP in 2009-10.
The IMF forecasts that as a result of persistent deficits, government debt in advanced G20 countries could rise to an average of 117 per cent of GDP in 2015. Across the IMF advanced economies the global recession has caused an increase in average debt to GDP ratios of 39 percentage points since 2007. The IMF forecasts that:
     * 10 per cent of this increase is due to the impact of the global recession on revenue and expenses from automatic stabilisers
     * 12.5 per cent is due to the impact of financial sector support, bail outs and lower revenue associated with falling asset prices and financial profits.
     * And 3.5 per cent is due to fiscal stimulus.
Unsustainable fiscal positions are a threat to global growth because they:
     * Sap confidence from financial markets.
     * Reduce fiscal flexibility and narrow the policy space for governments to support their economy through ongoing periods of weakness.
     * Push up global interest rates. The IMF forecasts that the expected 35% rise in debt could increase global interest rates by 2 percentage points and reduce advanced G20 country growth by at least 1 percentage point.
To avoid these consequences major economies must implement credible deficit reduction plans. This will not be easy. The recent IMF World Economic Outlook forecast that to bring the average debt-to-GDP of the advanced economies back to their pre-crisis levels of below 60 percent, will require average improvements in the structural balance of 8 per cent of GDP by 2020.
The scale of this adjustment will require a fundamental reshaping of government finances in many major economies. Fortunately, Australia is in a much stronger fiscal position coming out of the global recession.
Australia already has the lowest debt and deficit of any major advanced economy. In the 2009/2010 Budget, the Government implemented a series of fiscal rules that will return the budget to surplus in the coming years and reduce net debt to virtually zero by 2020.
First, the Government's 'expenditure rule' will cap the real growth in government expenditure to 2% once the economy returns to above trend growth - and this will apply until the budget returns to surplus.
Second, in order to meet the 2 per cent cap, the Government has set itself an "offset target" which requires the impact of new spending across the forward estimates to be fully offset in the budget.
Third, the Government has committed to saving the revenue improvement associated with a stronger economy, while ensuring that the level of taxation remains lower on average than the level we inherited in 2007-08.
These Australian fiscal rules are among the strongest and most credible in the world. As the IMF commented last year: "Few other advanced countries have adopted such a clear commitment" to return to surplus.
These rules represent the continued embodiment of the Government's core commitment to fiscal conservatism - as the private sector rebounds, the Government's direct support to the economy will contract. These rules have guided our fiscal policy this year and the results will be reflected in the Budget the Government brings down on 11 May.
The Australian Government is also working with our partners in the G20 to improve global fiscal sustainability. At the forthcoming Toronto meeting of G20 Leaders, we will work towards establishing robust and credible fiscal rules and targets. These rules will help us maintain confidence that government debt is being stabilised, if not reduced, over the coming decade.
Emerging markets have performed remarkably well through the global recession and are now rebounding strongly. While advanced economies are expected to grow by 2.25 percent in 2010, growth in emerging and developing economies will be double that rate at over 6.25 percent.
The resilience of developing economies is contributing to a surge in global commodity prices. Demand from China and other Asian economies contributed to a 40 percent rise in the IMF commodity index between February and December 2009, and over the medium term, commodity prices are expected to remain at high levels as demand in the emerging markets rub ups against sluggish capacity growth.
Australia has been and will continue to be a key beneficiary of the global commodity boom. Australia is already the world's biggest exporter of coal and iron ore, the second biggest exporter of uranium and soon to be one of the largest exporters of LNG.
After a dip in commodity prices last year, the RBA is now forecasting that Australia's terms of trade will rebound to 50-year highs this year. Already, spot prices for iron ore have increased by around 95%, metallurgical coal prices are up 55%, and thermal coal prices are up by around 40%.
Last month saw the biggest LNG contract signing in Australia's history. This agreement will see at least $10 billion invested in Queensland's new coal seam methane-based LNG industry. China will receive 70 million tonnes of LNG, making Australia a pioneer in LNG exports from coal seam gas.
The return of boom conditions in the mining sector can bring significant opportunities for our economy, our nation and our people, but we must also recognise the parallel challenge to ensure that our nation seizes these opportunities in full.
The first challenge is to ensure that Australia takes advantage of rising commodity prices to develop our resources to their full potential. Higher commodity prices create opportunities for some of our smaller mining operations and more marginal mining deposits. By supporting these parts of the industry the Government can help to broaden and deepen the mining sector in Australia.
The second challenge is to ensure that our mining success doesn't excessively impede other sectors of the economy. A growing resources sector will draw capital and workers to the mining states - increasing pressure on other industries and regions as they compete for employees and investment.
Third, the high demand for our resource exports is also likely to continue to support a strong Australian dollar. While this means continued downward price pressure on imports, it also means a more difficult economic environment for other exporters and import competing businesses. These businesses could find themselves stuck in the 'slow lane' of a two-speed economy.
Unless we recognise these challenges, Australia risks becoming a 'two-speed economy' as the resources sector absorbs more capital and labour, while manufacturing and other industries suffer a relative decline in competitiveness.
One of the challenges facing Government is how we can help to address the emergence of a two speed economy in a way that supports growth of all sectors and improves Australia's productivity growth over time.
Improving the productive capacity of the economy through greater investment in infrastructure is one response to the emergence of a two-speed economy. With the right infrastructure to support the resource industry and other industries, we will be in a position to take full advantage of the returns from our mining sector, and investing in major infrastructure - for example in high speed broadband - will help improve our capacity to grow the economy beyond the resources sector, ensuring that Australia continues to be an attractive place to set up a business, creating new jobs for now and the future.
Infrastructure is a critical ingredient of our future productivity growth and a critical support for the mining states as they struggle to support increased investment and production. We've been working to ensure that Australian businesses aren't held back by inadequate and poor quality infrastructure. We've established Infrastructure Australia and have embarked on the biggest nation-building infrastructure program in Australia's history, including a $36 billion transport plan to double investment in roads, quadruple investment in rail and invest in the nation's ports for the first time.
We're investing in a $43 billion national broadband network the infrastructure of the 21st century that will deliver super-fast broadband, turbo-charging businesses and transforming our classrooms and hospitals - but the challenge to provide Australia with the infrastructure we need for the coming growth phase is ongoing.
The Government will not rest on our achievements. We will continue to support nation-building infrastructure investment for Australia's future.
Another flow-on consequence of the mining boom is pressure on Australia's skilled workforce. That is why the Government has made investment in skills and education a key element of our productivity agenda.
The Government is investing in an education revolution that will prepare our kids for jobs in both the traditional trades and in industries of the future. We want to give Australian children the skills and tools to compete with the rest of the world for the high-skill and high-wage jobs of the future.
That is why we are establishing a single national school curriculum, providing parents with transparent information on school performance, delivering computer access to all year 9 to 12 students by 2011, making trades training facilities available to every secondary school, and delivering the largest school-building modernisation program in Australia's history, including state of the art libraries, science centres and language centres for many schools which have never had such basic facilities in the past.
Australia also faces a significant challenge to boost workforce participation. Boosting Australia's participation rate will assist with the challenge of the ageing of the population. It will also ensure that the growth of some sectors of the economy can bring more people into work, rather than taking resources from other sectors in a zero sum game.
To boost workforce participation, the Government has established Australia's first-ever system of paid parental leave, coming into effect from January 2011, increased the childcare rebate from 30 per cent to 50 per cent to support parents' return to work, and introduced a "learning or earning" compact with young Australians to make sure our kids are in either work or study.
A further consequence of the mining boom is a likely continuation of Australia's long history of current account deficits. The benign view of Australia's CAD is that it reflects a surplus of investment. The alternative is that it reflects a deficit of saving.
Certainly, growing foreign investment into the mining sector will perpetuate the debate about Australia's national savings.
The strongest element of Australia's savings is the $1 trillion pool of superannuation savings, the fourth-largest national pool in the world. Australia's superannuation system has created a tremendous source of national wealth. Australian Treasury estimates that, 25 years from now, this savings pool will have grown to $5 trillion, which will equate to 120% of Australia's forecast GDP of $4.2 trillion. This pool of savings has been a buffer for the Australian economy through difficult times and is a lasting tribute to the deep reforms engendered by the Keating Government.
In the 2009 Australian financial year, at a time when liquidity was being rapidly withdrawn from markets around the world, Australia remained an attractive place to raise capital. Australian-listed companies supported themselves through the crisis by raising $90 billion of capital - partly from Australia's domestic superannuation pool.
Improving Australia's pool of national savings remains a long term challenge for the nation.
The Government's health reforms will deliver important economic and financial benefits.
First, beginning 1 July this year, the Government will make direct investments in the health system to deal with fundamental imbalances between the supply and demand of health services across the country which can lead to poor health outcomes and reduced economic activity. This include training more than 6,000 doctors, funding 1,300 new hospital beds, and providing capital and recurrent funding to ensure reduced waiting times.
Second, the Government's reforms introduce long-term structural changes to the way that health services are delivered in Australia. These reforms will include increasing the efficiency of public hospitals through the introduction of activity-based funding. This will drive increased operational efficiency across the hospital system by explicitly linking funding to the provision of services. The National Health and Hospital Reform Commission estimated that the introduction of activity-based funding could lead to savings of between $500 million and $1.3 billion each year.
The Government will also establish an independent umpire to determine the efficient price of the full range of hospital services. The Independent Hospital Pricing Authority will determine the real cost of health services and therefore the real rate of growth in health costs. Its determinations will be the basis on which the Commonwealth pays its fixed dominant share of every hospital service that is provided.
For the first time, this means that tax-payers' contributions to public hospitals will bear a clear relationship to actual health service demand and costs. At present, hospital funding often ends up being spent on bureaucracies, and there is little transparency in how Commonwealth and State funding is actually spent.
Following last week's historic agreement, for the first time, all public moneys allocated to hospitals will flow directly to hospitals. Both Commonwealth and State funding will be warehoused in a fund at arm's length from State treasuries and health departments. From this fund, Local Hospital Networks will be paid directly for each activity they undertake, based on the fair and efficient price set by the independent umpire.
Together, these micro-economic reforms - the introduction of activity-based funding, the establishment of an independent pricing authority and the direct funding of local hospital networks - will drive efficiency across the hospital system through increased transparency and greater accountability.
Third, the Government's reforms will drive improvements in the allocation of health resources. By increasing investments in primary care and preventative health, the reforms will ensure that fewer people present at hospitals, freeing up beds for those who need them most and taking pressure of the health budget. As part of the funding reforms, the Commonwealth will not only become the dominant funder of public hospitals, it will also take full responsibility for all primary and aged care services.
The Commonwealth will have a strong incentive to ensure that patients have appropriate access to the full array of primary health care services in the community, because otherwise it will foot the bill for far more expensive acute care services delivered in public hospitals. That's why the Government is training more GPs and investing 436 million dollars to ensure people with long-term illnesses such as diabetes receive more sustained and integrated care and why the Government will continue to make important investments in preventative health, recognising that potentially avoidable conditions account for around 70 per cent of total health care expenditure.
If Australia meets these and related challenges, we will set ourselves up for a generation. If we make the right choices, we have the opportunity to deliver a period of strong prosperity which will improve the lives of not just this generation but future generations of Australians.
That is the motive we are taking into the forthcoming budget and response to Henry.
The Government has approached tax reform with the objective of ensuring Australia is well placed to meet future challenges and make the most of the global opportunities that present themselves.
Our purpose is to build a stronger, simpler and fairer tax system. A stronger tax system is one that makes Australia more productive and competitive in an increasingly globalised world. A fairer tax system ensures that builds opportunity, rewards effort and ensures no Australian is left behind. A simpler tax system means people spending less time complying with their tax obligations and reduces distortions.
Incremental reforms of the past half century have left a legacy of complexity; a system that can be unfair; and a system that unnecessarily impedes economic growth. Without reform to the tax system, an ageing population would make the structure of the existing system increasingly costly to society. Higher tax rates on workers would be borne by a decreasing proportion of society as workforce participation falls with the ageing of the population.
That is why in May 2008 the Government commissioned the most comprehensive review of Australia's tax and transfer system ever undertaken. The review was an opportunity to consider the tax and transfer system as a whole.
Over the last two years, the Government has already made significant reforms to the tax system including:
     * Lower taxes for individuals. From 1 July 2010, we will have cut tax for workers on $30,000 by $750, for workers on $50,000 by $1,750, and for workers on $80,000 by $1,550.
     * Support to working families through the 50 per cent Education Tax Rebate, which provides up to $390 per primary school child and $779 per high school child to help with the costs of education.
     * Low-tax First Home Saver Accounts - to offer a tax-effective way of saving for your first home through a combination of government contributions and concessional tax rates.
     * Reducing the withholding tax rate on distributions of income by Australian managed funds from 30 per cent to 15 per cent. A final withholding tax of 7.5 per cent will apply from 2010-11 and later income years.
     * And, of course, there was the $3.7 billion Small Business and General Business Tax Break as a key element of our stimulus plan. The temporary tax break was designed to help Australian businesses boost business investment, bolster economic activity and support Australian jobs.
In our response to the Henry Review, the Government will make the tax system stronger, fairer and simple.
A strong tax system should raise revenue in the most efficient and simplest way possible. Many of our existing taxes reduce productivity and detract from the overall efficiency of the system.
Incremental policy change has eroded the bases of even potentially efficient taxes.
Australia needs to respond to remain an attractive place to invest and do business. For that reason the Government's aspiration is to reduce the level of tax faced by the vast majority of Australian businesses.
The Government also understands the importance of a having a fair tax system. The Government has made some significant changes to the taxation and transfer systems in recent years to increase the fairness of our tax and transfer system.
By delivering permanent increases in pension payments the Government has strengthened the financial security of Australia's age, carer, disability and service pensioners. Payments have also been restructured to ensure that households relying on the pension are not disadvantaged by price increases.
The Paid Parental Leave for primary carers, to be introduced from 1 January 2011, is an important step towards ensuring our transfer system supports people when they need it most. Over time it will also increase workforce participation, particularly for women.
The Government will continue to ensure that Australia's tax system remains fair - particularly for small business and working families and seniors.
A simple tax and transfer system means people have to spend less time complying with their tax obligations and transfer entitlements. Time spent interacting with the tax and transfer system is a deadweight cost on society. In particular, time and resources wasted on tax compliance and administration could better be spent by businesses in producing goods or services that are of value to the community and most people can always find better things to do than fill out tax returns. Smaller businesses tend to bear a higher proportion of the burden of complexity and red tape.
Some complexity in the tax and transfer system is unavoidable, but the Government is committed to reducing complexity where we can to give taxpayers more time with their families and cut red tape for business.
Let me finish where I began - in the next two weeks the Government will release its tax policy and budget package. These events are an opportunity to capitalise on Australia's success through the global recession.
If we make the right decisions we will convert our strong economic position into a new generation of prosperity. These decisions are being made in the context of the significant domestic and global economic challenges facing Australia, including:
     * The challenge to return the budget to surplus following the global; recession through prudent conservative fiscal rules to govern expenditure and tax receipts;
     * The challenge to ensure all Australians benefit from the global commodities boom;
     * The challenge to boost investment in infrastructure;
     * The challenge to increase investment in skills and boost workforce participation;
     * The challenge to reform our health and hospitals system and provide sustainable finance for the future.
As Prime Minister I am deeply optimistic about Australia's future. I believe that if we capitalise on our strong position today we can create extraordinary opportunities for the future.


Thanks very much and welcome to the biggest Labour Day March anywhere in Australia, here in Brisbane.
Men and women of the Australian labour movement, you know, for a hundred years or more workers of this movement have been gathering in rallies like this throughout our history. And together we gather, standing on the shoulders of giants who have come before us. Together, men and women of the labour movement have shaped this movement for more than a century. Men and women of this movement have come together to form the great unions that you represent here today. Unions like the Missos, unions like the RTBU, unions like the AFULE, unions like the CFMEU and those I can't see in the crowd, the AWU, the Shoppies, the rest, the whole union family, forming this great Australian labour movement.
I look down in front of me and I see this, this T-shirt that says to me 'together we can make it happen'. Can I say to you, the men and women of this movement, together we are making it happen, right now.
What is it that unites our movement? One single rallying cry - 'a fair go for all'. A fair go when it comes to jobs. You know, in the last year or so, our political opponents said 'don't worry about the global recession, don't worry about the global financial crisis, just let the free markets reign'. They said 'do what they do in New Zealand instead'. Can I say, what we did as a Labor Government, was say that was not good enough. When the private sector is in retreat it's time for the government to advance. That's what we did. We protected - you and us and business together - more than 200,000 and 300,000 Australian jobs. Thank you to the labour movement.
A fair go for jobs. A fair go also, for something as basic as health and hospitals. I see our friends here from the Nurses Union. I see also our friends from the Missos - those I've worked with in the last several months on fashioning a big reform in health.
25 years ago a Labor Prime Minister called Bob Hawke delivered to Australia Medicare. 25 years later this Labor Government delivered to you a new National Health and Hospitals Network, funded nationally, run locally and, for the first time in our history, the Australian Government taking on the funding of the hospital system for the future. That's labour reform.
A fair go in health. A fair go in jobs. A fair go also in education. When I look at the reforms of Whitlam in times past, bringing in an expansion of our university places, what are we now building across Australia? The biggest school modernisation program this country has ever seen - 9,500 schools, government and non-government; 24,000 projects right across the country. New libraries, new science centres, new centres for learning, new multipurpose halls for young kids, however much money their parents have, to make sure they have a fair go at education. That's what the labour movement stands for.
A fair go for jobs, a fair go for our health and hospital networks, a fair go also for education, a fair go also for super. For superannuation for working families. 15 years ago Paul Keating stood before the nation and said working people deserve superannuation. And they said he was wrong. Paul Keating was absolutely right, we need to build superannuation for working people for the future. We moved it from three per cent to six per cent to nine per cent. This Labor Government now delivers to you 12 per cent on superannuation. A huge reform.
When I've looked at, when I've looked at what working people are supposed to retire on to give them comfort and security in their retirement years, right now it's just not enough. We need to build on that so that working people have a decent amount of money to retire on. 12 per cent is a huge step in this direction.
A fair go on super, a fair go on education. A fair go on health and a fair go on jobs.
Men and women of this labour movement, we also believe that what is fundamental for the future is to have a fair go when it came to getting rid of WorkChoices. A fair go in introducing the Fair Work Act. A fair go in getting rid of unfair dismissal. A fair go in making sure we're protecting the basic rights of working people right across Australia. And then we have Tony Abbott up there and saying this, he's going to bring back WorkChoices, he's going to bring back AWAs, he's going to bring back, bring back unfair dismissal. He stand opposed to our 12 per cent super. He stand opposed to what we want to do with the new National Health and Hospitals Network. He wants to abolish fundamentally, abolish fundamentally the school modernisation program, and he says the recipe for jobs is do what they do in New Zealand.
Can I say I couldn't see a more fundamental contrast? We, a Labor Government standing for a fair go for jobs, a fair go for health, a fair go on education, a fair go on super and a fair go when it comes to getting rid of WorkChoices. Our job is to build a future for working people everywhere.
I met before, a bloke in the Missos, in the Missos march. He said to me, his name was Bill, he's a cleaner, he says he works for Myer. Bill is worried about his job security. I said to Bill, one of the things we want to make sure that we can do to help workers like you is to make sure we never ever return to unfair dismissal. For people like Bill. For cleaners like Bill. For people who need the protection of unions like yours and the labour movement like this and the Labor Government which you represent. Our job and our solemn duty is to defend their interests and the great cause of the Australian fair go for which this entire movement stands.
I thank you.


Last weekend, the Government delivered its response to the Henry Review on Taxation. Next week, the Government delivers its third budget.
Through both, the Government is delivering on the two core elements of our economic strategy: tackling the immediate macroeconomic challenges from changing global and national economic conditions, while undertaking the long-term microeconomic reforms to build a more productive and globally competitive economy.
Through fluctuating global economic circumstances over the last two years, the Government has implemented a consistent countercyclical fiscal policy to support macroeconomic stability. We have also sought to lay the foundations for long term prosperity by building the enablers of sustainable market-based growth - by investing in skills, infrastructure and a regulatory framework that boosts productivity growth, workforce participation, and brings about a seamless national economy.
These have been the two fundamental elements of the Government's continuing economic strategy since its election.
Through the Government's tax policy announcements last week we have sought to strengthen public finances, increase the global competitiveness of our economy, support small business and boost superannuation for working families.
Through the Government's budget we will continue to deliver stable conservative fiscal policy - through a 'no frills' budget that continues to consolidate on and deliver our overall economic strategy together with social policy and environmental policy.
Two years ago, when the Government was framing our first budget in 2008, I gave a speech in Perth outlining the framework that would guide our approach to that budget. I said in that speech that our first budget would be governed by the following four principles:
"Our first priority is to build a strong economy through responsible economic management - a strong economy that also delivers for working families.
Second, we are committed to honouring our commitment to help working families under financial pressure.
Third, we will deliver on our commitments to prepare Australia for the great challenges of the future - acting on areas of long-term government neglect: in education, health, infrastructure, climate change and water.
Fourth, we will plan and provide for our nation's long-term defence and security needs in a rapidly changing threat environment."
These were the four principles we outlined before our first budget. Looking back, these four principles have been applied in both of the last two budgets we delivered and now, two years later as we finalise our third budget, those same principles continue to guide our approach to fiscal policy for the future.
The first budget principle I laid out two years ago was responsible economic management - to maintain our economic strength.
The Australian Government's first two years have seen significant swings in global economic conditions from the inflationary boom of 2007, through the global slump of 2008, and towards the emerging dawn of a new era of growth following the worst global recession since the Great Depression. Through these cycles, the government has maintained a conservative countercyclical fiscal policy: restraining public expenditure growth when the private economy is strong, and stepping in to protect jobs and businesses when the private economy is weak.
This policy approach guided our response to the boom conditions the Government inherited two years ago. In 2007, the Australian economy was suffering from capacity constraints, inflation was rising to 16-year highs, and the Reserve Bank had delivered 10 consecutive interest rate rises.
In these circumstances, the Howard Government - perversely - ran a procyclical fiscal policy. Despite the booming Australian economy from 2003-2007, real spending grew at an average of 4 per cent a year - including 5.2 per cent in the final budget year in the middle of the boom. New spending decisions in the Liberals' final Budget totalled $40 billion over the forward estimates.
Saul Eslake, former ANZ Chief Economist said last year: "The previous Government squandered much of the good fortune that came its way...We could have run much bigger surpluses..." 
Prior to coming to Government, I committed to end the era of fiscal irresponsibility under the Howard Government. From Opposition I articulated our fiscal strategy through a medium-term fiscal framework. This medium-term fiscal strategy was the most comprehensive commitment to fiscal discipline ever provided by an Australian government.
This statement provided the first commitment in Australia's history to keep the budget in surplus over the cycle. This framework guided the preparation of our first Budget - delivering responsible countercyclical fiscal policy.
The 2008-09 Budget delivered savings of $33 billion over four years. This was nearly three times the total savings delivered by the Liberals in their last three years in Government.
The Government budgeted for a surplus of $21.7 billion, or 1.8 per cent of GDP, in the 2008-09 Budget to provide a buffer for difficult economic times. Towards the end of 2008, global economic conditions changed rapidly and dramatically. Major developed economies fell one by one into recession. Global merchandise trade fell by around 40 per cent.
Again, the Government applied countercyclical fiscal policy to protect Australia from the global recession. The Government took strong and decisive action to provide immediate support to the economy including cash payments to support consumption, the trebling of the first-home owners' boost and an increased business tax break for private investment.
The Government's economic stimulus plan focussed on the urgent need to support the economy rapidly but also kept one eye on the future needs of sustainable economic growth. That is why about two-thirds of total direct investment under the nation building for recovery strategy is investment in infrastructure.
As the IMF concluded: "The increase in public investment will continue to support activity in the near term, while addressing infrastructure shortfalls." 
As we emerge from the global recession, the Government will continue to apply the same core economic principles.
Last year, when Australia like all other developed economies around the world was dragged into deficit through collapsing revenues brought about by the massive contraction in global economic activity, the Government enshrined our budget principles in three core fiscal rules to guide the budget back to surplus in a post-global recession environment.
First, the Government's 'expenditure rule' caps the real growth in government expenditure to 2% once the economy returns to above trend growth, and this will apply until the budget returns to surplus.
Second, in order to meet the 2 per cent cap, the Government has set itself an offset target which requires the impact of new spending across the forward estimates to be fully offset in the budget.
Third, the Government has committed to saving the revenue improvement associated with a stronger economy, while ensuring that the level of taxation remains lower on average than the level we inherited in 2007-08.
These Australian fiscal rules are among the strongest of any in the OECD. As the IMF commented last year: "Few other advanced countries have adopted such a clear commitment" to return to surplus.
And Australia is in a better fiscal position than other countries.
Of course, much international attention is currently being focused on the fiscal crisis in Greece. This highlights the fact that the global financial crisis is not over yet and we continue to cast a weather eye on the global reverberations of developments in Europe. But beyond Greece, the challenge of restoring fiscal sustainability exists across most advanced economies.
     * In the United States, the budget deficit is expected to be 11.0 per cent of GDP this year.
     * In the United Kingdom, the budget deficit for 2010 is expected to reach 11.4 per cent of GDP.
     * In Japan, the deficit is forecast to be 9.8 per cent of GDP.
     * By contrast, MYEFO forecast Australia's deficit to fall to 3.5 per cent of GDP in the 2010-11 financial year.
Large fiscal imbalances across the industrialised world are resulting in a large accumulation of public debt. According to the IMF, the global recession has caused an increase in average debt to GDP ratios in advanced economies from about 75 per cent in 2007 to about 110 per cent in 2014. As a result, government debt in advanced G20 countries is projected to rise to an average of 117 per cent of GDP in 2015.
In contrast, again, the Mid Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook forecast that Australia's net public debt would peak at 9.6 per cent of GDP in 2013-14, and by 2015 will be in decline.
Most economies are only in the earliest stages of finding their way back towards fiscal balance. Australia is acting well ahead of the pack.
We have articulated strict and clear fiscal rules, and by complying with those rules we have an unambiguous pathway back to surplus. Australia's fiscal rules will ensure that our budget position remains the envy of the world. These rules represent the continued embodiment of the Government's core commitment to fiscal conservatism - as the private sector rebounds, the Government's direct support to the economy will contract.
These fiscal rules will ensure that this budget is not a pre-election spendathon. This will be a no-frills Budget with conservative fiscal management firmly at its core.
Despite the fact that 2010 is an election year, this Government will not be repeating the pattern of Liberal pre-election splurges. We will stick to very strict limits on spending while responsibly investing in our health and hospital system, building critical economic infrastructure, and boosting superannuation.
The fiscal policy of the Liberal party is not characterised by the same clear and disciplined framework. Since Tony Abbott became Leader of the Opposition, the Liberal Party has racked up $11.8 billion in unfunded commitments over the 5 years from 2009-10.
     * More than $2 billion through his opposition to our responsible reforms to private health insurance rebate, which Treasury estimates will still see 99.7% of people remaining in private health insurance, because he would rather have teachers and nurses subsidise the private health insurance of politicians and millionaires.
     * Almost $3 billion to reinstate welfare for millionaires, including removing the means test on the Baby Bonus and Family Tax Benefit B.
     * More than $5 billion over the next 5 years for his so-called climate change policy.
     * Over $1 billion on unfunded road commitments.
And now Mr Abbott is threatening our ability to deliver $12 billion in tax reform by not supporting a new resource super profits tax which will ensure all Australians can benefit from the commodity boom. This means we won't be able to deliver tax cuts to businesses, including small business, or improve the adequacy and equity of our superannuation system.
Instead, he would slap a huge tax bill on business - around $2.7 billion each year - to fund a Paid Parental Leave scheme that offers full replacement income for a person on $150,000 a year.
The Liberal Party has a magic pudding approach to economic policy, where they complain about debt, spend money like drunken sailors and rarely, if ever, advance budget savings. As the budget approaches, Mr Abbott has no alternative but to come clean with the Australian people and tell them what taxes he is going to increase, or what services he is going to cut to meet the cost of almost $12 billion in unfunded election promises he has already made.
The second budgeting principle I articulated in 2008 was a commitment to help working families under financial pressure. This budget will again deliver for working families through scheduled tax cuts from 1 July 2010.
Since coming into office, the Government has reduced the tax burden on working Australians three times. From July 1 this year:
     * Someone on $30,000 will pay $750 less in tax than in 2007-08 - that's 26% less tax
     * Someone on $50,000 will pay $1,750 less in tax than in 2007-08 - that's 18% less tax
     * Someone on $80,000 will pay $1,550 less in tax than in 2007-08 - that's 8% less tax
Since coming to office we have taken practical steps to ease the pressure on working families' budgets. To help pensioners week to week the Government provided an increase in payments to around 3.3 million pensioners, including people receiving the Age Pension, Disability Support Pension, Carer Payment and service pensions. From 20 September 2009, around 2.3 million full rate pensioners have received a significant increase of $35.41 a week for singles and $14.96 for couples at a cost of $12.3 billion over the forward estimates.
The Government is helping working families meet the cost of education through the education tax refund. For the first time, eligible families can claim up to $750, gaining a $375 per child refund, for each child undertaking primary school studies and $1,500, gaining a $750 per child refund for each child undertaking secondary school studies. Around 1.3 million families and 2.7 million students can benefit from the scheme.
The Government is supporting families through the Teen Dental Plan to improve the dental health of teenagers by providing a voucher to eligible teenagers which in 2010 is worth $157 to assist with the cost of a preventative dental check. The Government has committed $490.7 million over five years for the Teen Dental Plan which commenced on 1 July 2008 and has already seen more than half a million teenagers receive a check up because early dental health is critical for later life.
Last week the Government announced an historic reform to boost the retirement income of more than 8.3 million Australian workers. The Government's superannuation reforms will make Australians more secure in their retirement - taking away some of the worry many working families feel when they think about the future. Our plan includes concessions on additional Superannuation Guarantee contributions, a new government contribution for low income earners, and higher caps for over 50s. Increasing super from 9 to 12 per cent will mean:
     * Someone aged 30 now on average weekly earnings will be $108,000 better off at retirement.
     * Someone aged 40 now will be $57,000 better off at retirement.
     * Even someone who is 50 now will be $22,000 better off at retirement - and even higher if they take advantage of the new tax break for additional super contributions from older workers.
Taken together, these reforms to income tax, pensions, superannuation, health and direct family assistance for education have helped the family budget to deal with cost of living pressures.
The third budget principle I laid out in 2008 was that the Government would deliver on our commitments to prepare Australia for the great challenges of the future, acting on areas of long-term government neglect: in education, health, infrastructure, climate change and water. We have never lost sight of our core long term economic strategy - to reform Australia's economy, boost productivity and build a platform for future growth. That reform process must be anchored to productivity growth, workforce participation and the development of a seamless national economy.
Over the past two years, our Government has been acting decisively to turn around our nation's flagging productivity performance. We've been working to ensure that Australian businesses aren't held back by inadequate and poor quality infrastructure. We've established Infrastructure Australia and we have embarked on the biggest nation building infrastructure program in Australia's history, including a $36 billion transport infrastructure plan to double investment in roads, quadruple investment in rail and invest in the nation's ports for the first time.
The Government is also boosting productivity by investing in an education revolution that will prepare our kids for jobs in both the traditional trades and in industries of the future. That is why we are establishing a single national school curriculum; providing parents with transparent information on school performance; delivering computer access to all year 9 to 12 students by 2011; installing state-of-the-art trades training facilities available to every secondary school; and delivering the largest school building modernization program in Australia's history with new libraries, science centres and language centres.
The Government is also countering the effect of the ageing of the population by boosting workforce participation. We have established Australia's first-ever system of Paid Parental Leave, coming into effect from January 2011, increased the child care rebate from 30% to 50% to support parents return to work, and introduced a 'Learn or Earn' Compact with Young Australians to make sure our kids are in either work or study.
The Government is also committed to delivering long-term productivity growth by creating a seamless national economy. It makes no sense for Australian business to have to abide by up to 8 different state regulatory frameworks. That is why the Australian Government has worked through COAG to identify 27 areas of regulation which should be harmonised to create a seamless national economy across Australia, including occupational health and safety.
The Government is also committed to a superfast national broadband network to ensure our schools, hospitals and businesses have the infrastructure necessary in the 21st century. We are committed to a National Broadband Network because fast and affordable broadband is the only way we will be able to compete with economies in our region like Japan, Korea, and China. If we don't have fast broadband it will cost us lost jobs and lost business opportunities that will go to countries overseas.
The National Broadband Network is the single biggest nation building project in Australia's history; it is modernising the Australian economy for the future.
Today, the Minister for Broadband Stephen Conroy is releasing a 500-page Implementation Study. I pleased to announce that the Study confirms that our National Broadband Network vision for Australia is achievable and can be built on a financially viable basis with affordable prices for consumers.
12 months ago, the Government committed to investing in a $43 billion NBN. The Study confirms that the company will generate sufficient earnings by the end of year 7 so that the Government's recommended investment peaks at $26 billion.
The Study confirms that the NBN business model establishes that taxpayers are paid back their investment with a modest return by year 15 of the project on the basis that privatisation is completed.
The Implementation Study shows that the National Broadband Network can be done - and we are absolutely committed to it.
By contrast, I note that the Opposition spokesman declared this morning that he didn't care what the study said - he said, quote "...even if the study makes out a business case, that won't alter our view." Let me just say: this takes Opposition for opposition's sake to a new level - they are opposed to the biggest single modernising nation building project in Australia's history even before they see a plan that says it can be done.
The Opposition spokesperson went on to say, quote: "...there are alternatives that are more responsible to deliver faster and affordable broadband." Well - here's my challenge to the Opposition: let's see your broadband plan. In two and a half years of opposition they haven't offered any concrete alternative plans and in Government they had 18 failed broadband plans in 12 years that left Australia with some of the slowest and most expensive broadband in the developed world.
On Sunday the Government took decisive action on a key area of microeconomic reform and one with profound macroeconomic consequences. The tax plan will:
     * Keep government finances strong;
     * Protect the future of the Australian economy; and
     * Ensure working families and small businesses get their fair share.
These reforms will allow all Australians, including working families and small business, to share in the benefits of the resource boom. These reforms will convert Australia's economic strength into a new generation of prosperity for the future. These reforms will make our whole economy stronger:
     * Reducing company tax to keep it competitive with similar OECD nations will create new jobs, attract investment and grow the economy.
     * Cutting tax and reducing red tape will boost Australia's 2.4 million small businesses.
     * Building a $5.6 billion fund for investment in nation building infrastructure such as better roads, more rail, and bigger ports will help to support growth for the future.
     * And increasing Australia's pool of superannuation by $85 billion will strengthen our economy and lift our national savings - these measures are projected to add around $500 billion to the existing pool of superannuation savings, and contribute to further increasing national savings by around 0.4 per cent of GDP by 2035.
Finally let me make some remarks about the Resource Super Profits Tax. I want to address some of the recent commentary head on.
First, I believe it is right that the most profitable mining companies pay more during a global commodities boom. All Australians deserve a fair share of our natural wealth, but the fact is that as prices have risen in recent years the share coming back to Australians has been falling.
10 years ago royalties used to account for 1 dollar in 3 of mining profits. now they take 1 dollar in 7. Resource profits were over $80bn higher in 2008-09 than in 1999-2000, but governments only collected an additional $9bn in royalty revenue.
Second, the mining boom has brought benefits to Australia but also some costs in terms of increased demand for infrastructure. Every community in Australia - and especially those in the resource states - are crying out for infrastructure. When Infrastructure Australia opened for applications it got $14.5bn in applications from Western Australia. State premiers themselves have tried for 20 years to negotiate with the mining companies to raise royalties - partly to fund infrastructure.
It is surprising that a Premier such as the Western Australian Premier could constantly ask the Commonwealth Government for infrastructure but oppose the tax that provides the finance for that infrastructure.
The third area of debate in the community is about the impact of the RSPT on investment in the resources sector. Let me be clear that the design of the RSPT aims to broaden our mining sector and increase overall mining production.
Put simply, if companies aren't earning super profits, they don't pay the tax. In fact, the new regime can actually help more marginal mining ventures because state royalties will be refunded, meaning that emerging mining companies may actually get a cash flow gain, and for exploration companies, the Commonwealth has provided a billion-dollar exploration rebate to encourage the development of our natural resources.
For these reasons, independent modelling by ECONTECH shows that the Government's reforms will increase mining activity in Australia by around 5.5 per cent.
The mining industry is a great industry. I want to see it broadened and deepened in Australia.
I thank the mining executives I have met with over the last few days in Western Australia for their engagement with the Government. The conversations I have had were robust; but constructive. Some other commentary has been less constructive.
The Government's tax reform plan will help Australia take full advantage of the economic opportunities that lie ahead:
     * broadening and deepening our resources industry by boosting emerging mining projects and providing greater incentives for exploration;
     * funding the rail, roads and ports our resources sector needs and making investment in nation-building infrastructure a permanent structural feature of State and Commonwealth budgets for the future;
     * increasing the competitiveness of Australian business - particularly small businesses who drive employment and innovation in our economy.
Over the last 18 months, Australians have faced one of the toughest global economic challenges in our lifetime. As we look back, I am proud of the success of Australia in navigating the global recession. It is a testament to the ability of the whole community - businesses, unions, workers and government - to pull together, and the strong and decisive leadership from government economic policy.
I am proud of the Government's economic stimulus strategy and the results it has produced.
I am proud of the more than 200,000 jobs that Treasury estimates were saved by the stimulus.
I am proud that so many Australian businesses kept their doors open while so many millions closed overseas.
I am proud that Australia had the shallowest slowdown of all the advanced economies.
In fact, the overall economic report card is strong. Compared with all the major advanced economies, Australia has the fastest growth, the lowest debt and deficit, and the second lowest rate of unemployment.
This should be a reason to be confident. It should not be a cause for complacency. Just as we worked hard to ensure our economy was the envy of the world during the downturn, we now must work hard to capitalise on this position as we move through the economic recovery phase and a return to economic growth.
That is why the Government is taking strong action through the Henry Review and through the Budget to deliver responsible economic management.
This will be a no-frills, fiscally conservative Budget that will fund the substantial health and tax reforms we've announced in recent weeks. We will stick to very strict limits on spending while responsibly investing in our health and hospital system, building critical economic infrastructure, and boosting superannuation.
It will be a responsible Budget that makes the key investments in our future that are so critical to turning our success during the global recession into a stronger economy for working families.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
It is great to be back here at our national university.
My visits are becoming so regular I'm expecting Ian Chubb will soon renew my old student card.
I'm back for a good reason.
Not just to remember where Therese and I met.
And not just because of Chubby's relentless lobbying for the ANU.
But because the ANU has a very special role in driving one of the Government's key objectives - building better links between the expertise in the academic community and the Australian Public Service.
Last August I spoke at Burgmann College about the special history of the Australian Government and the formation of the Australian National University.
I spoke about the need to reinvigorate that rich and fruitful relationship for a new century with many new challenges for policy makers and for government.
Today I want to discuss how the Australian Government plans to take the relationship of the Public Service and the ANU forward.
And how we plan to take forward the reform of the Public Service itself.
To be frank, Australia is not so flash at connecting the work of academics with the work of government.
Too often, our education and research institutions inhabit a parallel universe to that of government and the public service.
Whether it's Canberra, or Melbourne, Sydney or other major cities - our academics can occupy the same space as public servants, but it's as if they transmit on different wave lengths.
They know of each other's existence.
But they don't often tap into the relevance of each other's work.
So their connections are not strong.
And both are diminished as a result.
Academic work is less empirical and less relevant.
And policy making is less well-informed and less effective.
The Government I lead is determined to take a new direction.
And the Australian National University is at the heart of this new direction.
To build a stronger, more productive relationship between the Government and academia.
And a stronger, more skilled and more innovative Australian Public Service.
Good for the university - given its leading national role in research and education.
And good for the APS - which stands to gain much from access to the best new research on difficult challenges, and from a more highly skilled public service.
The building that we open today recalls one of Australia's greatest public servants.
Sir John Crawford was an outstanding example of strategic leadership and collaboration between academia and government.
His contribution to public service, economic policy, agriculture, academia and international relations spanned from the 1930s to the 1980s.
It is extraordinary to consider the scope of Crawford's career.
From being recruited in 1942 by the great Nugget Coombs to the Department of Postwar Reconstruction - the crucible of a generation of extraordinary public service leaders.
And right down to advising Prime Minister Bob Hawke in the 1980s, on the early steps that would later lead to the formation of the APEC forum.
Sir John's career saw outstanding service in both government and academia.
He led the departments of commerce, agriculture and trade.
He was one of the great architects of Australia's post-war growth.
He was an outstanding humanitarian, a major force behind the development of Australia's overseas aid policy, and a man with an inspired vision for Australia as a source of principle and fairness in building new institutions for a global world.
On so many matters, Crawford was way ahead of his times.
In 1960 Crawford crossed the Molonglo River as it was then - now Lake Burley Griffin - and came to the ANU.
His contribution here was as rich, productive and diverse as it had been on the other side of the river.
He became professor of economics in and director of the Research School of Pacific Studies here at the ANU.
Later he became vice-chancellor and then chancellor.
He was determined to build the links between the university and government.
He made it a condition of accepting the ANU job that he must have the freedom to take part in government inquiries and policy making.
And so he did - though governments did not always take his advice.
In 1965, for example, the Menzies Government was not persuaded of the need for a greater role for government in economic planning, despite the recommendations of Crawford and other members of the Vernon Committee.
Sir Robert Menzies dismissed the Vernon recommendations as the mere "pretensions of academic experts".
Clearly, Menzies had strong views about the difference between the two sides of Lake Burley Griffin - academics had their place, and government had its.
Crawford's leadership at the ANU saw extraordinary progress.
From re-establishing the department of international relations, to contributing to the establishment of the Strategic and Defence Studies Centre, the Contemporary China Centre, the North Australia Research Unit and the Australia-Japan Research Centre.
Centres that have each upheld the goal of productive engagement with government.
As we look to renew the relationship between the ANU and the Australian Government, there is no finer example than John Crawford to inspire that vision.
Since coming to office almost two and a half years ago, the Government has been tackling many of our long-term future challenges.
From the education revolution to the national health reform agenda.
From tackling climate change to advancing a vision for an Asia Pacific community.
From dealing with entrenched problems like homelessness to building a more productive, competitive economy.
And through this time, dealing with the deepest crisis in global financial markets and the global economy in the past 75 years.
Strategic policy leadership and strategic policy advice is essential for each of these challenges.
It is difficult to provide strategic policy advice.
And while the Australian Public Service does a fine job, I believe we can always strive to do better.
Cabinet sets the Government's strategic goals.
That is a fundamental precept of our Westminster democracy.
But Cabinet will do that job much better if we have the best possible advice from our public service.
And public servants will be in a much better position to offer us the best advice if they have the best analytical skills and access to the best research from those with specialist knowledge.
And that is where the university community comes in.
Public service fosters the development of generalists, with excellent skills at solving problems and administering programs.
Universities foster the development of specialists.
Of course we need both, and they should complement each other.
But too often, public servants and academics don't talk to each other at all.
Or, when they do, they talk past each other.
You can see this in academic research that doesn't take account of real world constraints.
You can also see it in public service advice that lacks analytical clarity and ignores academic research and evidence.
Too often, public servants and academics stay in their ivory towers and concrete castles - just occasionally sticking their heads over the parapets to peer out to the world beyond.
The world, we might say, on the other side of Lake Burley Griffin.
The challenge we face is to build an ongoing dialogue.
That means public servants taking a stronger interest in research, and cooperating with academics in their field.
And it means encouraging academics to recognise their research could have greater impact when it deals with practical challenges for policy-makers.
Though to make it clear, it does not mean academics abandoning their independence, and nor does it mean that all research should have immediate relevance.
Consider the complexity of the policy challenges on which the Government is acting.
     * How do we tackle entrenched disadvantage so that children growing up in low-income areas get the literacy and numeracy skills and educational opportunities of other Australian kids?
     * In the health system, how do we build a genuinely integrated health and hospitals network, where patients experience a seamless transition between hospital and community based services?
     * How do we manage the challenges of a new resources boom and a two-speed economy to the lasting benefit of all Australians?
These are all areas where expert research is of great value as a key input for policy makers.
The Government has sought to elevate the role of academic experts in many of our policy-making processes during the past two years:
     * on the National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission, whose recommendations helped shape our landmark decisions on the National Health and Hospitals Network;
     * with the reform of the Australian Public Service, on which Professor Glyn Davis of Melbourne University and Professor Patrick Weller of Griffith University contributed as advisers; and
     * through the Review of Australian Higher Education, led by Emeritus Professor Denise Bradley.
Australia's think tanks also play an important role in shaping policy debates and influencing policy outcomes - through centres including:
     * the United States Studies Centre at the University of Sydney;
     * the Grattan Institute located at Melbourne University; and
     * the Cape York Institute for Policy and Leadership, a partnership with Griffith University.
But these examples are the exception, rather than the norm.
Our challenge now is to build much stronger links across the public service and across the university community in the future.
Last September I announced a review to drive the future of the Australian Public Service, under the leadership of the Secretary of the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, Terry Moran.
Their report, Ahead of the Game, was launched on 29 March.
It sets out a comprehensive blueprint for reform in four key areas:
     * the first is to forge a stronger relationship with citizens through better delivery of services, and through greater involvement of citizens in their government;
     * the second is to strengthen the capacity of the public service to provide strategic, big picture - advice that addresses the most difficult challenges of the day;
     * the third is to invest in the capability of the public service workforce -
         * through better recruitment and training; and through greater mobility within the public service;
         * through alignment of conditions across agencies;
         * and through a better approach to managing employee performance;
     * and the fourth area for reform is to improve the efficiency and quality of the public service -
         * by creating agencies that are agile, capable and effective;
         * by helping them plan;
         * and by helping them improve their performance.
The blueprint made 28 recommendations under those four themes.
I want to thank Terry Moran and the advisory group for their work on the report.
Today I am pleased to announce that the Government is accepting, in full, the recommendations of the APS reform blueprint.
We are committed to building an Australian Public Service with a culture of independence, excellence and innovation - in policy advice and service delivery.
And the recommendations in the report provide a roadmap to achieving that goal.
A key finding of the report is the need to reinvigorate the public sector's links to the outside world - with academics, research institutions and with private sector experts.
Strengthening those links is a key part of strengthening strategic leadership in the public service.
I'm pleased that responsibility for strengthening this relationship is being taken up by the new Secretaries Board - the high-level APS leadership body whose establishment was a key report recommendation.
Another key element of reform is to strengthen training and skills development within the APS.
Responsibility for this and other aspects of workforce planning and recruitment will be taken by the Australian Public Service Commission (APSC).
In line with the recommendations of the APS review, every public servant will be expected to take part in some learning and development activity every year.
Every department and agency will be required to provide, every year, for each public servant, a significant opportunity to take part in some learning and development activity, including training and education, on-the-job training, and coaching and mentoring.
Every year, the APSC will create a learning and development strategy to drive this process.
And it will design and implement a performance framework across the public service that encourages them to develop their knowledge and skills.
The Australian National University will have a key role in building a better, stronger Australian Public Service.
To that end, I am pleased today to announce a major development for the Australian National University and its relationship with the APS.
Last year, I came to the ANU and spoke about our need to strengthen the institutions behind public policy making in Australia.
I spoke of institutions like the Kennedy School of Government in the United States - an institution where the flow of experts between government and academia sharpens expertise in both.
An institution whose ethos reflects John F. Kennedy's great call to service - "Ask not what your country can do for you - ask what you can do for your country."
The Kennedy School is a collection of eminent social science research institutions, comprised of 15 institutes and research centres and over 30 executive education and degree programs.
Together, these institutions draw on the resources of the entire University to make the School a centre for training enlightened public leaders that attracts some of the best students from across the world.
I said it was time for Australia to aspire to building a uniquely local version of the Kennedy School.
Today, I am pleased to announce an historic step towards this vision, with the establishment of the Australian National Institute for Public Policy (ANIPP) here at the ANU.
As a prominently branded entity, the Institute will focus the expertise of several of the ANU's centres and schools that work in public policy and will also draw on the expertise of ANZSOG.
The Institute reflects a new partnership between the public service, ANZSOG and the ANU and will ensure Government draws on the wealth of expertise that exists across the ANU and ANZSOG networks.
The first pillar of the Institute will be an expanded Crawford School of Economics and Government.
The Crawford School is a recognised leader in public policy education, thinking and innovation across the range of policy areas.
The expanded Crawford School will maintain its focus on public policy research and research training, along with courses in public policy.
However it will include new programs to build stronger links between academia and public policy implementation and conduct research relevant to the public policy priorities of the Government.
The other foundation pillar for the Institute will be an enhanced presence for the Australia and New Zealand School of Government (ANZSOG).
Through ANZSOG, Australia has built a unique public policy and public sector management institution.
It is a model uniquely adapted to the Australian federal system, bringing together a consortium of Governments and universities from around the country.
As a result, Australia finally has high quality public sector executive leadership training and development of a standard superior to most places in the world.
The ANZSOG presence in Canberra will be expanded, to help it achieve its goal of building executive leadership in the public service, through its courses with a vocational professional focus on public administration and public sector management, and its public sector research program, led by the Sir John Bunting Chair in Public Administration.
Last month, I announced the establishment of the Australian Centre on China in the World and the National Security College.
Both these institutions will be part of the Australian Institute of Public Policy.
The Crawford School will also host one of the most important tasks for the new Institute - the HC Coombs Policy Forum, which will draw expertise from across the ANU and ANZSOG.
The Coombs Policy Forum pays tribute to Nugget Coombs, one of the greatest Australians of all, and the man who recruited John Crawford into the Commonwealth Public Service.
The role for the Coombs Policy Forum will be to help translate high-quality public policy research into useful, innovative published analysis for use by the APS and other governments.
This is often the missing link in the relationship between government and the university community.
The Forum will conduct roundtables, conferences, seminars and public lectures, and will also host a high-level international Fellowship program.
It will also provide tailored information and advice to Parliament and the public service through briefings, policy consultancies and other forms of collaboration.
The Institute will also improve links between research and public policy by supporting PhDs for APS employees to undertake research in key areas of public and economic policy.
These PhD scholarships will be provided through the Sir Roland Wilson Foundation.
The Commonwealth will provide up to $14 million over four years to the ANU to support the establishment of the Institute.
The expansion of the Sir Roland Wilson Foundation will be supported by a $7 million one-off grant from the Government and matched by contributions from the Sir Roland Wilson estate and the ANU.
These new funds are in addition to the $35 million foundation grant for the Australian Centre on China in the World, and the funding for the establishment of the National Security College of up to $17.3 million, that I announced last month.
I believe the ANU is the ideal venue for the Institute of Public Policy - for precisely the reasons the university was established in Canberra 64 years ago.
Its proximity, its research excellence and its international reputation in public policy make the ANU the natural partner in the Australian Government's plan for strengthening the Australian Public Service.
As we look to the future of a new Institute here at the ANU, today we open this magnificent new building.
In many ways this building will be at the heart of the new Institute of Public Policy.
The designers of the JG Crawford Building have done a great job of blending the new building with the Old Canberra House, an important part of the ANU's heritage.
Old Canberra House was built in 1913 to provide accommodation for the Territory Administrator in its earliest days.
It was the first substantial house associated with the new capital.
And it is now part of the latest addition to Canberra's list of outstanding public buildings.
I also want to congratulate on the ANU on the work done to preserve the other heritage-listed cottages nearby - the constable's cottage, the gardener's cottage and the chauffeur's cottage.
The architects' vision is for the JG Crawford Building to create a courtyard heart for the public policy precinct, with the aim of fostering interaction among the community of researchers, scholars and practitioners in these surrounds.
It is the hub of the dedicated new public policy precinct here at the ANU - creating an environment for first class research, teaching and collaboration.
The Government will also be providing up to $37.9 million for two new buildings to further enhance this precinct; one for the China Centre and one for the the National Security College and ANZSOG.
All up, the Australian Government will invest up to $111.7 million in the ANU public policy precinct to create a world class facility for public policy researchers, teachers and practitioners.
Sir John Crawford was a great nation-builder.
A builder of the economic and social policy, of national institutions and of the ANU itself.
This building celebrates his legacy and calls for the development of a new generation of nation-builders.
Policy-makers and policy analysts with a vision to make a difference and build a stronger and fairer Australia for the 21st century.
It plays an important part in the Government's vision for a first class public service, with exceptional people, providing strategic leadership, doing outstanding work for the citizens of Australia.
I repeat what I said last year: that my overarching ambition for the Australian Public Service is that it should aspire to be the best in the world.
We want to make the APS a top career choice for our best and brightest - a rewarding and intellectually challenging profession, with world class training and tools, that helps create a better future.
The Australian Institute of Public Policy and the APS reform blueprint will help equip the leaders of the Australian Public Service of today and tomorrow - the policy analysts, advisers and public sector leaders.
In short, the nation-builders of Australia's future.
In that context it gives me great pleasure to declare open the home of the Crawford School for Economics and Government, the JG Crawford Building. 


PM: It's really good to be here at the Men's Shed in Whittlesea, and to spend some time talking to Phil, and also to the other blokes who are here this morning. Ron, who's been doing some excellent woodwork over here, and also Eddie the Dutchman up there for his fine scone making skills, which I hope you as ladies and gentlemen of the press may be able to sample as well on the way through.
What we're here to talk about today is Men's Health. Blokes are basically pretty hopeless when it comes to their own health. That's my experience of it, blokes are pretty hopeless when it comes to dealing with their own health. They either think that they're invincible - that is; that they can just tough it out. They don't like talking about it usually, and frankly, the problem with all that is it makes it really hard to deal with men's health problems before they become too serious. So that's where frankly, the work that's been done here at this local level at the Men's Shed in Whittlesea is so important.
I was jsut talking to Rob Mitchell, our candidate for McEwen about this before, and the important role which Men's Sheds play in bringing blokes together to talk about anything and everything but including their health and practical things which need to be done to deal with health problems as they arise. So there's no stigma attached to wondering when and where you should get a prostate check-up; so there's no worry about frankly talking about mental health problems. So there's no concern about talking about what it is to be depressed, and how you can deal with those sorts of things when they hit you.
So that's what's really good about this group of blokes here, because they're the sorts of things they're talking about as well. Of course another part of that is just blokes coming together.
I grew up in a country town in rural Queensland, and there were always CWAs, and there were lots of organisations where the women of the community would get together and have a natter and a chat about stuff which is of concern to them, often their health as well.
I don't recall in the town I grew up in there was any such association for blokes apart from the local pub. The good thing about this is it's actually changing that around. And what I've seen here at Whittlesea this morning, I'm told from the Men's Sheds Association folk, we've got 300 or more of these now growing across Australia. That's a really good thing, because it brings blokes together in a pretty welcoming environment, do things practically together, make things, most importantly having some friendship - for isolated blokes that's really important - and talking about the things that worry them, including their health, and most importantly work out ways to deal with it.
What we're doing today is releasing Australia's first ever male health policy, first ever. It's a pretty important time that we do that, we're probably about 110 years late, but it's good that we're doing it and I'd really like to congratulate Warren Snowdon, the Minister, for his work in putting this policy together.
This is a really important document for the future. It provides us with the framework to deal with men's health associations right across the country, it provides us and State Governments with a framework within which we can help those organisations on the ground to make things better for blokes who are dealing with health challenges. It's good work. It hasn't just been plucked out of space. This is the product of extensive consultations across the community - Warren tells me some 26 public forums across Australia, involving one or two thousand people, discussing what actually makes a difference on the ground when it comes to improving the health circumstances of blokes.
On average we die five years earlier than women. Now, that's in part because we don't deal with preventable diseases. Various things like cardiovascular disease, lung cancer - their rates are much higher with blokes than they are with women.
Therefore we've got to turn that around, and where there is a preventable opportunity for doing that, we've got to grasp it with both hands and do something about it.
This policy therefore today encourages men of all ages to take action to improve their own health. It seeks to provide information, assistance and support across a number of key priority areas. It will involve an investment of some $16.7 million specifically dedicated to dealing with men's health challenges.
Now this investment includes a number of pretty important components. One of which is a $3 million investment for the Australian Men's Sheds Association, to help secure the future of Men's Sheds and to support those sheds into the future. I asked Phil before, what problems have you got here at Whittlesea, always useful to sit down and talk to the locals over a scone or two, or three, and find out what makes it work here and what could make it work better.
He said to me that Men's Sheds around Australia work on the basis of a couple of things. One, obviously, getting enough local blokes feeling comfortable about what goes on in the shed, but two, having enough finance to make it work over time.
So this investment of ours to the Men's Sheds Association is designed to do that. The other thing that we're doing is investing nearly $7 million to establish what's called Australia's first longitudinal study into the social determinants of male health, to understand all the social, economic and behavioural factors which affect the length and quality of the health of Australian men.
That's never really been done before, and that's why we need to do it. What's happening here is from the ground up, very practical things being done in sheds like this. But we also need to look at the science, and actually study what happens with men's health journeys over time, so that we can actually deal better with some of the challenges which are faced here in local communities.
One of the other things we're doing also is to assist with half a million dollars or thereabouts, to assist in the provision of regular bulletins on men's health in order to provide the most up to date information, right across the spectrum, to organisations like this, so it's on hand, on tap, and it's in a way which people can understand.
I saw up the back, by the way, a pamphlet which was headed 'What the Hell is...' and it named a particular disease condition. I didn't even know what the name of the disease condition was, but it's stuff like that which actually is very helpful for people on the ground.
So to those of you who are here at this Men's Shed here in Whittlesea, can I say to each and every one of you - you're doing a really good thing. Not just in terms of getting together and providing opportunity for you yourselves as blokes to talk about men's health challenges, but you know something, you're also giving back into the community as well, and the stuff you make here, you're contributing to the community life. And it's also good to see the local community, like the local TAFE, chipping in with the provision of some of these woodworking lathes that I see up the back here at the moment.
We have a big interest as a Government in making sure that this takes off more right around the country. Because guess what, blokes need a bit of support when it turns to dealing with men's health issues which they frankly, have been not the flashest on in the past. It's time to turn the corner on all this.
Warren did you want to add on this before we hop into questions?
SNOWDON: Just briefly Prime Minster, I think the unique nature of this men's health initiative, needs to be properly understood. It is the first, and that's why I think it needs to be applauded. But I want to also just highlight just one other main item that we're funding, which addresses Indigenous men. A $6 million program to address Indigenous men's health, and their families, to work with men so that they have more of a role in bringing up their children together, so it's very much a family orientated initiative and something that we're very pleased to announce. Prime Minister, I think you've summarised it extremely well, thank you.
PM: Thanks very much Warren, and having said that, I'm happy to take any questions you've got.
JOURNALIST: PM, [inaudible] you're launching or releasing the scoping study of the NBN today. Are you confident that that project is still viable?
PM: I'll leave those who are currently being briefed in Canberra to discuss the internals of that study on the future of the National Broadband Network. Let me be very clear, this Government is determined to build a National Broadband Network, and will not let anything get in its way. And the reason for that is that wherever I go across Australia, people are crying out for effective, high-speed, decent bandwidth broadband.
Let's go to health for example. I was recently at a community in Perth, where they described to me the absolute importance of having decent bandwidth to get health information around about individual patients. I was at a GP Super Clinic in the northern suburbs of Brisbane a few days ago, in fact on Monday, and they are fully geared up to be able to whip patient data right around the country, to specialists and experts in a particular disease category, on one condition, there's enough bandwidth to do it and right now there isn't.
So if you, for example, Phil down here has a health condition, sorry if you don't have one Phil but I'm about to tell the world that you do.
PHIL: - That's okay.
PM: Mate, most of us do. And he goes off, gets all of his diagnoses done, wherever he gets them done at the local hospital here, the local specialist. He goes to Queensland on holiday, he gets crook. We actually need to be able to get all of his patient data through as quickly as possible and that's called patient controlled electronic health records. We've got no system in the country at the moment to whip that stuff around. The result? Phil gets a worse diagnosis than he would otherwise get because the local docs up there don't have his historical health data, and secondly he has to get diagnosed again which costs the heath system thousands and thousands of extra dollars and Phil as well. You know something, that's got we've got to change.
I just give you one example therefore. So, national broadband network, this government will not be deterred from rolling out a national broadband network because it benefits the economy. It benefits business. It benefits the provision of decent health information, right around the country, benefits education and a whole lot of areas we haven't even thought of yet.
JOURNALIST: Are you disappointed that you weren't able to get it further along the line in your first term?
PM: Ah, the National Broadband Network? We always recognised that this was a long term project, but can I explain to you what's now happening in Tasmania? In three locations in Tasmania we're already rolling out the network. So, we're already up and running. Very soon there will be further announcements to this effect as well across the country. We will not be deterred, despite the opposition from some of the largest Australian companies, from this occurring because we believe it is in the national interest for this important piece of national infrastructure to get out there. It is fundamental to this economy's needs for the 21st century.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how concerned are you by the situation in Greece?
PM: I saw those reports late last night just after I arrived here in Melbourne from Perth and they are disturbing. I've spoken before to the Greek Government, since the election of the current government, about the challenges it faces. It is a sober reminder of the fact that the financial crisis in Greece has a capacity to affect wider Europe, and the health of the wider European financial system has a capacity to affect what's going on more broadly across the world. I've said it before and I'll say it again - we've done well in Australia to navigate this economy through the global financial crisis. But looking globally, the global financial crisis ain't over yet and we're not out of the woods yet either. Greece is a reminder of that.
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
PM: I'll just take, did you have a follow up over here and then I'll head over here.
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
PM: The Department of Foreign Affairs looks at these very carefully, all the time. We have many Australians of Greek origin. Here we are in Victoria, in Melbourne, not too far down the road, there's a huge Greek community here and in other cities in Australia as well.
The Department of Foreign Affairs will be analysing the situation carefully and issuing any appropriate revisions to travel advice. The experts do this without political interference from anybody and they take advice from the relevant police and security authorities around the world.
JOURNALIST: Are you concerned by reports that the mining companies will use their large coffers to campaign against your super profits tax and your Government at the next election?
PM: We have taken our decision on the future of the tax system based on the national interest. And so, we've looked at one core fact which is, about a decade or so ago, for every three dollars in mining profits about a dollar went to the Australian people through taxes. Now, for every seven dollars earned in profits by the Australian mining industry, one dollar comes to the Australian people in taxes. We believe the time has come for the Australian people, for small business and for workers and their super to get a fair share of the natural resources of this country which are owned by the Australian people. So, we believe this is the right policy for the national interest.
The second thing I'd say is it's also the right policy for the future of the mining industry. The petroleum rent resource tax has operated on a similar basis on the North-West Shelf for the last 20 years and it's given rise to massive new projects like the Gorgon Development announced in the last 12 months worth nearly $50 billion. Obviously there's going to be a scare campaign by some because they fear that some of their super profits will in fact come back to the Australian community to fund better tax for small business, better super for working Australians, better infrastructure for entire nation.
I just note what Bernie Fraser, the former head of the Reserve Bank had to say on this in the last 24 hours. "Inevitably," he said, "there's going to be some crying wolf in all of this". And Mr Fraser, the former head of the Reserve Bank, has been very explicit about the fact that this is very much in the national interest.
So, I imagine that some within the mining industry will dig deep within their very deep pockets and seek to run a political campaign. We will not be deterred one bit. This is a decision in the long term national interest, good for the economy, good in the long term in broadening the base of the mining industry as well, according to the detail of the tax. But you know something? Important in terms of giving a fair share for working families and their super, a fair share for small business with big tax breaks and a fair share to fund the infrastructure that Australia needs for the future.
JOURNALIST: How seriously are you taking threats from mining companies about halting projects in light of these proposed changes?
PM: Well, I notice that a number of statements have been made by various mining companies. As I said on the day that we released our new policy on Sunday, there will inevitably be threats and warnings of project closures. That's the way in which these negotiations with mining companies usually happen. I say again, however, the Government will not be deterred. The Government believes this is the right tax for Australia's future because the Australian community deserve a fair share from the resources, the natural resources which the Australian people themselves own. That is what we're standing up for and we will not be deterred from that course of action.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister there's a lot of, going back to today - thank you for the scone by the way.
PM: How was it by the way?
JOURNALIST: It was delicious.
PM: Did anyone have one of my scones by the way?
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
PM: What was mine like?
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
PM: No, no, the ones that I made.
JOURNALIST: [inaudible]
PM: Okay, alright, you go.
JOURNALIST: There's obviously lots of awareness of women's health through very high profile campaigns such as, you know, breast cancer foundations, the pink campaign. Do you think men should be doing something similar, maybe we should be doing something blue for instance, about men's health?
PM: You mean, it's like a blue singlet day? What do you think guys? We can call it Jackie Howe Day? I think there's something in that, you know. There's something about our, frankly, our gender which, we don't tend to talk about these things. That's what's got to change because if you don't talk about them, you're never going to find out that there's something wrong with you and you won't find out what you could do to stop it getting worse or stop it happening in the first place. So I'll leave it to Warren and the creative arts department to come up with a specific proposal on that, but maybe it's time we thought about something like that.
For example, I've been very much caught up with Glenn McGrath and the McGrath Foundation and the excellent work they do for breast cancer. We're now funding breast cancer nurses with the McGrath Foundation in 40 or 50 locations around Australia. Now they do a terrific day. Everyone who watches the cricket over summer knows that it's very pink on a certain day and actually causes people to think about breast cancer because it's such a scourge for women in Australia. So let's think about how we bundle together the concerns about blokes' health. What do you think, Blokes' Health Day?
SNOWDON: I reckon a blokes' day would be good.
PM: Okay, let's just think about how we up the profile.
JOURNALIST: Mr Prime Minister, the Men's Shed you're in today, it came about from support from the community, a government grant, partnershipping of the Agriculture Society and the Whittlesea Community Building Initiative. And we've got a great model here. Would your program envisage this being a model for future Men's Sheds around Australia?
PM: Let me say one or two things in general about that and then I'll turn to Warren for a more detailed answer. I actually talked to Phil before about how this one got up and running. It's a pretty good story. As I'm advised, the first meetings a couple of years ago, I think you got this shed up last September/ October. Have I got it right? The local show society pitched in because, I presume, they're used to putting up pavilions and things. That's just my assumption. Most of the equipment that you see has been donated from the local community and by local supporting business. I'm told that the revenues generated out here - I don't think I'm giving anything away as a national secret - about $4,000 a year in selling the products which are made here. I know all of you journalists will be putting your three bucks in the coffee jar out the back there before you go. I'll be watching and counting. What we're seeking to do with this $3 million investment, is to actually expand our partnership with Men's Sheds around the country.
You know what I find often works best is when you've got community organisations which actually grow things from the ground up. We then come in and partner, without ever trying to take them over. Because that's when I think you lose your local spirit and your local sense of control. That's what we want to do. So what we've got to find is a way in which we keep your local enterprise, initiative and enthusiasm alive but that additional helping hand on the way through. Warren.
SNOWDON: Just very briefly, I think the Men's Shed Association is the organisation to which we refer and defer in a sense to provide us with this advice. There are different models around the country. This is obviously a very good one and we need to work with people wherever they are because one size won't fit all, to work with people from where ever they are to help facilitate a process of getting Men's Shed's around the county.
PM: Okay folks, well having said all that I might zip.
One final thing, by the way, on the question of the super profits tax, I notice there's a debate today again on whether Mr Abbott will oppose or support this. From his current statements that he's opposed. Can I just say that if Mr Abbott blocks these reforms, he's standing in the way of and blocking better super for working Australians for their retirement, and decent tax breaks for 2.4 million Australian businesses. I would call on him to think very carefully about blocking this basic reform which delivers a fair share for working families, their retirement and a fair share for more than two million Australian small businesses. Thanks folks. 


Thank you Alan, and thank you, Crystal, for that extraordinary performance.
When I first met Alan Jones, probably about three or four years ago, I was Leader of the Opposition and I remember him saying to me in that funny studio of his out there at 2GB, off air he said this: 'You know something? There's an epidemic of cancer out there. Everybody I know has been touched by this. Everybody I know is having someone in their family or their immediate circle of friends who has been stricken.'
That was before, of course, Alan himself faced his own challenge, and it says something about how widespread this challenge is for all Australians and for young people that that is our national story.
If I looked around this room of leaders tonight - whether they are captains of sport, captains of industry, captains of politics - I doubt that any person could put up their hand now and say they know of nobody in their immediate circle of friends or family who is not now affected.
In that conversation Alan said to me 'Have you heard of a bloke called Chris O'Brien?', and as a loyal son of Queensland and someone who never watched RPA I said I didn't have a clue who Chris O'Brien was. He said, 'You should track him down about what needs to be done on cancer.' So I did.
Chris O'Brien, for those of you who did not know him or have the honour of knowing him, was an extraordinary Australian - not just a television star on that program RPA as it was, but also a brain surgeon and someone who specialised in neurological cancers, and the ultimate, ultimate irony - the cruel and saddest irony - was that he himself became stricken with brain cancer. Our foremost surgeon, our foremost neurological surgeon in this city and probably across the nation, and certainly the public face, himself struck down.
So at Alan Jones' suggestion I actually went and tracked this bloke down when I was Leader of the Opposition. Didn't know him from a bar of soap, just sat down, and he took me through the journey of someone who has sat on one side of the bed, and someone who now lay on the other side of the bed.
I just sat there for a couple of hours and listened to this bloke as he unfolded the story, and it was an extraordinary story. In the time that I've been Prime Minister I've only authorised one state funeral in this country, and that was for him. He died a year or so ago, he fought an extraordinary fight - an extraordinary fight - and his single message was this to me: for words to become deeds, we need to invest in this killer disease.
100,0000 members of our fellow Australian family are stricken with this disease each year - 100,000. That is a truckload of people; it's a huge number of people. 1,600 of them are very young people, very young people of the type of whom we've been speaking tonight.
I was talking to Andrew from your Foundation earlier this evening and it seems that we have a friend in common, or we had one. You may have seen me on television recently visiting practically every public hospital in Australia. By the end of that tour of Australia I was ready to conduct minor surgery myself I'd received such a rolling instruction from the clinical specialists of our country.
But with one of the young faces up there, we think, I sat down with her on her bed as she slowly began to slip away. She was a very young person - one of that 1,600 - one of those very human faces.
And so when Chris O'Brien says if you want to make a difference, invest: invest in the women and men of science who are at the forefront of this; invest in those who provide the clinical treatment up front, close and personal, doing everything within their power to wrest this person back from the abyss; and do everything you can in terms of what the clinicians describe as palliative care - what we would describe as basic human love and compassion.
So, Governments can't do everything, but they can do a bit. In fact, if they are minded they can do a lot. It's one of the reasons, and I attribute this to Chris O'Brien, that I became personally and passionately engaged in this cause - cancer at large.
We've now invested $2.3 billion in cancer initiatives across the country. There are the big ones which get the headlines. That's fine. Here at RPA the Chris O'Brien Centre as it will be, a radical expansion of the Garvan in the city as it should be, a fine institute. In Melbourne the centre at Parkville - $300 million-plus. It will be a world centre of excellence as well.
But it's also the smaller things. Here's one figure which should command all of our attention, and it's this: if you live outside one of our capital cities and outside one of our major regional centres, you are three times more likely to die within the first five years of diagnosis than if you live in one of those cities - three times more likely. You see, what happens is people just shrug. They say it's too hard, why should I bother? If I'm in Townsville, where we think the young person we have in common may have been, why, why, why should I put myself through the trauma of travelling to Brisbane, 1,000km away, for the basis diagnosis, the subsequent diagnoses, the basic treatments - isn't it better just to spend what time you have left with those who are near and dear to you rather than completely uproot your family life and the life of those who are near and dear to you.
And so making sure these centres are available to people who live outside grand cities such as Sydney, the most beautiful city in Australia, but also available in Bunbury, available in Tamworth, available in Ballarat, available in Townsville - that's really important. A huge number of our fellow Australians live out there, and they deserve a fair go as well.
You know, young people in that age bracket we're talking about - they don't get dealt a fair go. As Australians we passionately believe in this thing called a fair go, but if you're a young person in the prime of their lives, 16, 17, and then the diagnosis comes in, the truth of it is you haven't been given a fair go. That's where we can make a difference - to give them a fair go, and it's not just through making sure that the clinical services are available, but we're out there at the forefront of global and national research to find a breakthrough to make a difference.
So that's what we're on about together - Government playing its role, you as captains of industry with a heart of compassion I believe doing what you can as well. That's what makes a difference.
So for young people, you can ride on. It's great, you should do it. We're in there with $15 million. I understand the state governments of Australia are collectively throwing in 20, and you, the community, are being asked to raise a further 15. That's good.
I'm confident we're going to get there - drag out your mobile phones, the old ones, all those loitering in your top drawer at the office. I opened my top drawer the other day and I was astounded at what I saw. That was before I got to the mobile phones.
It makes a difference. I understand from the campaign so far some 50,000 have been surrendered in the first month alone - each of those is worth a buck or two. Hop into it, it's worthwhile.
But I finish by saying this, and I think back again to the young girl nearing the end of her life in a hospital bed in rural Queensland - I think her voice, like those who survive, like one of the names on your website, Jess, a 15-year-old, which I read on my way in from the airport here this evening. She survived. She said, though, in her blog that at the age of 15 I began to plan my funeral. There's something very visceral about that - sort of hits you in the solar plexus. It gets you.
But the great mark of a great country is that we care and together, you in business, we in Government, together with the whole community, can make this difference - so let's do it.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY 
It's great to be here with you today as we take the next step at the launch of the national advertising campaign "DonateLife, Discuss it today. OK".
This is something that I am passionate about.
As a donor recipient myself, I am absolutely committed to increasing the rate of organ and tissue donation in Australia. As is everyone in this room.
We all know that there is a high level of public support for organ and tissue donation.
But while transplant success rates in Australia are among the best in the world, organ and tissue donation rates remain comparatively low.
At any given time, approximately 1,700 Australians are waiting to get the call for a life-saving or life-transforming transplant - this includes some 1,200 Australians waiting for a kidney transplant.
One of those people waiting by the phone for that call was Dean Jobson.
I had the privilege of meeting Dean back in February, at the launch of Organ Donor Awareness Week.
Dean is your average knockabout bloke, a young bloke from Goulburn.
Except that at that stage, Dean had been waiting 19 months for a heart transplant.
He couldn't work, he was dependent on a mechanical heart to keep him alive, and his dad had been forced to give up work to be his carer.
But Dean had a great attitude, which impressed everyone who saw him in the Theatrette in Parliament House that day.
He didn't feel sorry for himself.
Instead, his attitude was:
"I'd prefer to be alive and on a transplant waiting list than the alternative. I've still got the chance."
And ladies and gentlemen, I'm very pleased to be able to say today that Dean got his chance.
Recently, Dean got that long-awaited phone call.
There was a donor.
Dean got his transplant.
And he's doing well.
He's now an outpatient at St Vincent's Hospital in Sydney.
And he's hoping to be home for good sometime in the next fortnight.
His transplant has made a huge difference to him because he no longer needs his ventricular assist device - his mechanical heart.
He's now an ordinary bloke, with an extraordinary heart. He's happy, and his parents are over the moon.
Dean's cardiomyopathy affected everyone in his family - his life, of course, but also his parents' lives as they needed to care for him at a time when they might have thought about taking things easy.
This beautiful gift from a selfless donor and donor family has given Dean and his family their lives back.
Dean's story is a very real example of why the Australian Government is committed to increasing the rate of organ and tissue donation in Australia.
That's why in July 2008, the Australian Government announced the $150 million World's Best Practice Approach to Organ and Tissue Donation for Transplantation plan.
This is a national reform plan built on international best practice and experience, with three core elements:
     * A coordinated, national approach to organ donation and transplantation;
     * Expert, dedicated staff on the ground in all our major hospitals to enable organ and tissue donation to proceed; and
     * Increased community awareness about the importance of organ and tissue donation and the difference it can make.
We've made significant progress in laying the foundations for change in public hospitals.
We've improved hospital systems.
We've established a national clinical network of staff - over 150 doctors and nurses in 76 major hospitals around the country dedicated to improving organ and tissue donation.
Across the country, the new hospital medical directors and nursing staff are spearheading change within hospitals, enabling donations that might not otherwise have gone ahead, including from smaller regional hospitals for the first time.
And these donations are happening.
I am advised that recently, a hospital that had never previously been involved in organ donation was able to help a family to carry out the wishes of their loved one.
And by doing so, three Australians received a life-changing transplant. And two of these people had been on the waiting list for more than seven years.
Donor Family Support Coordinators are being rolled out for the states and territories.
These dedicated, compassionate experts support families through the traumatic, confusing and highly emotional process of making a decision about their loved one becoming a donor. And they support those families, whatever decision they make.
In addition, new clinical triggers to help identify potential donors and additional funding to hospitals to make sure costs are not a barrier to organ donation are making a difference.
The early signs are encouraging - and the Government believes that Australia can do much better as the reforms transform the approach to organ and tissue donation across the country.
But while hospitals have a pivotal role to play, equally important in our quest to boost donation rates is what takes place outside the hospital walls.
Community awareness is absolutely vital.
And that awareness can be raised around the kitchen table.
On the couch in the ad break. In the car on the way to the shops. Over coffee or a meal or a drink at the bar.
We need to talk to the people we love about what we want to happen when we're gone.
And we need to know what their wishes are regarding organ donation.
Because families that know each other's donation wishes are more likely to uphold them.
And families will always be asked to give the final OK before donation can proceed.
That's why it is vital to discuss organ donation with your family.
This is the third element of our reform plan.
Research tells us that the vast majority - around 80 per cent - of Australians support organ donation and think it is important to discuss it with their family.
However, only 17 per cent of Australians have actually discussed their donation wishes in detail with their family and loved ones. And 37 per cent have never had that discussion.
We have to change those statistics. We have to make sure that all Australians have the facts they need to make an informed decision.
And that they understand that they need to share their decision with the people close to them. Too many Australians do not talk about organ donation.
40 per cent of Australians do not know whether their loved one would want to be a donor or not. Many family members do not confidently know each other's wishes.
Many people have not discussed their donation decision with family members for more than a year.
Many can't remember whether they have had the discussion at all.
We know that the most important thing people want to know in order to make a decision about consenting to organ donation is - is this what they wanted?
The simple fact is that even if a person is registered as a donor - and I encourage you all to register as a sign of your commitment - their family will always be asked to give consent for donation to take place.
The family is always asked to give the final OK and that is why it is important for the people close to you to know your decision about organ donation.
There are many non-government organisations who are working tirelessly at the local level to raise awareness of organ and tissue donation within the community.
This campaign will supplement their endeavours.
Working together we can make a difference.
When I look at South Australia's long history of strong performance in this area, with its rate of donations above 20 donors per million population - double the national average of around 10 donors per million population for the last decade - I know that we can do better across the country.
We need to do better to help the many Australians who need an organ or tissue donation to survive. It's as simple as that.
There are many people passionately committed to increasing awareness of organ and tissue donation and working tirelessly towards building a world class system.
And I commend their contribution, and thank them for it.
Today we are launching a call to action to all Australians. It is time for all Australians to:
     * discover the facts about organ and tissue donation;
     * decide about becoming an organ and tissue donor, and
     * discuss their decision with their family and friends.
It is time for all those dedicated health professionals in the sector to work together to ensure that families are given the opportunity to have their loved one's intention to donate carried out.
It is by doing this that we will help save the lives of many Australians who are waiting for a new chance at life.
From tomorrow night, Australians across the nation will begin to see this television advertisement.
And I hope it will encourage all Australians to begin talking about organ and tissue donation.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY 
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, the first peoples of this land to trade and engage with the region we now call Asia.
I am honoured to address this gathering of eminent Australians committed to enhancing our country's engagement with Asia.
A gathering that is sponsored by two great institutions.
The Asia Society has a long history in the United States and has established itself as a strong presence here in Australia over the past 13 years.
It has joined Asialink in carving out for itself a key role in promoting Australia's relations with Asia.
This year, we mark the 20th anniversary of Asialink's founding.
In 1990, Australia's first Ambassador to the People's Republic of China, Professor Stephen Fitzgerald, joined with the Myer Foundation to create a new institution dedicated to building bridges of learning and understanding between Australia and Asia.
And so Asialink was born.
In Asialink's 20th anniversary year, I pay tribute to Stephen Fitzgerald and Sid Myer, and thank them - on behalf of the nation - for their vision and persistence.
I also thank emeritus Vice Chancellor, Professor David Pennington, who had the foresight to offer Melbourne University as the home for Asialink.
Asialink's anniversary represents 20 years of tireless work to promote public understanding of the countries of Asia and of Australia's role in the region.
Twenty years in which Asialink has grown from two people operating from a Carlton terrace house to a team of 45 staff in world-class headquarters in the Sidney Myer Asia Centre at the University of Melbourne, where Heads of State and international conferences can be hosted.
Twenty years, also, in which Australia's engagement with and attitudes toward Asia have been transformed.
In 20 years, Asialink has grown in influence and reputation.
In partnership with Education Services Australia, and with core government funding, it has established the Asia Education Foundation to inform curriculum development and educate teachers.
It conducts study tours that make Asia literacy a reality for hundreds of Australians.
It undertakes business engagement and leadership programs that shape the relationships of the future.
And the PricewaterhouseCoopers Melbourne Institute Asialink Index is a vital new tool for assessing how well our aspirations for Asia engagement translate into reality.
The Asialink Index has brought together for the first time a diverse array of data ranging from trade and investment to tourism, migration and humanitarian assistance.
The index shows that Australia's engagement with Asia has grown by a factor of more than four since 1990 - significantly outstripping our engagement with the rest of the world.
In other words, our level of economic and cultural engagement with Asia is now more than four times what it was 20 years ago - reflecting a transformation in Australia's place in the global economy.
In the same period our ties with the countries of South East Asia have also grown by a factor of four.
And our relations with China have grown by a factor of 15.
As the global balance of economic and strategic power shifts to our region, Asia matters to Australia as never before.
The Asia Pacific accounts for 60 per cent of the world's population and 70 per cent of the world's carbon emissions.
This year the region, with China at its core, will be responsible for 75 per cent of global economic growth.
Asia-watchers also know that our region can be subject to instability and strategic competition - as recent events in Thailand and the waters surrounding Korea have reminded us.
It is home to the six largest standing armies in the world.
Rapid economic growth is fuelling defence spending.
And we know from history that major shifts in the geostrategic balance have rarely occurred without upheaval.
Against this backdrop, this government's approach has been one of active engagement and creative middle power diplomacy.
I am proud of what we have achieved with Asia.
We have added new depth to our key bilateral relationships.
We have pushed forward the debate about the future of our regional institutions.
On the defence and security side we have increased ties with key partners in the region, including Japan and South Korea.
With Japan we established the International Commission on Nuclear Non-proliferation and Disarmament.
This independent Commission's report has formed the basis of joint work by the two governments that we have taken to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty Review Conference currently underway in New York.
This is a clear illustration of the shared values and interests we have with Japan.
With South Korea we now have for the first time a framework for our security cooperation.
We have broadened our relations with India having forged a new strategic partnership - reflecting a commitment by both governments to move beyond the fitful engagement of the past and into a long-term partnership.
Our relations with China had some bumps in the road last year, but are very strong.
We have had a series of senior visits in both directions that underline the commitment of both countries to the relationship.
And our pavilion at the Shanghai Expo is a demonstration of our commitment to a good relationship with China.
I am told - by the Vice Chairman of China's Central Military Commission, General Guo Boxiong who visited Australia last week - that our pavilion at the Shanghai World Expo is one of the best!
Our relations with Indonesia are at an all time high.
Earlier this year we hosted President Yudhoyono of Indonesia.
He became the first Indonesian President to address the Australian Parliament.
And we both agreed that the relationship between Australia and Indonesia had never been stronger.
We have worked hard with the new Government of Prime Minister Najib in Malaysia to build on our strong historical links to bring our relationship into the next phase - a phase where we work together not just bilaterally, but also regionally and globally.
We have hosted senior visitors from Vietnam - Prime Minister Dung and General Secretary Manh of the Communist Party.
These visits resulted in us agreeing to establish a Comprehensive Partnership - a road map for taking forward the relationship across a wide range of fields.
Our bilateral political, security and defence ties with key partners are growing.
So too are our commercial ties.
Last year, Australia's trade with Asia outstripped our commerce with the rest of the world by 50 per cent.
But we are not content to leave matters there.
We are negotiating free trade agreements with China, Japan, South Korea and Malaysia, and we hope soon to commence talks with India and Indonesia.
We are working to advance Australia's standing as a regional hub for financial services.
On the regional political front, we are an active member of the major forums of the region, including the East Asia Summit, the ASEAN Regional Forum and APEC.
This year, we joined the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation summit as an observer.
In October, for the first time, we will participate in the Asia Europe Meeting.
We will have a seat at the table when the leaders of world's most economically dynamic region meet with the leaders of the world's largest single market - the European Union.
We are working closely with regional partners such as South Korea, Japan, China and Indonesia to reform global economic governance through the G20.
And we have instigated the debate on how best to shape regional architecture to form a community capable of addressing the full range of shared challenges facing the Asia Pacific.
This question is critical for our future.
We need a stable and prosperous region.
We need to shape regional dynamics so that cooperation and dialogue are the norm.
We cannot simply sit by and watch relationships in this dynamic region unfold.
I welcome very much the decision of ASEAN leaders at their summit in Hanoi on 8-9 April this year to encourage the United States and Russia to deepen their engagement in evolving regional architecture.
I note also that President Yudhoyono of Indonesia and Prime Minister Lee of Singapore said after they met recently that inviting the US and Russia to meet with ASEAN and the six other members of the East Asia Summit - China, South Korea, Japan, India, Australia and New Zealand - would be one way to achieve this deeper engagement.
It is clear that a range of partners in Asia agree with Australia that reform of our regional architecture - including, vitally, deeper engagement with the United States - is needed.
This is what we are seeking - engagement in a cooperative institution of all of the key players in the region.
In sum, our diplomatic relations with Asia have never been stronger.
But, as you at this forum are well aware, that is not the whole story.
True engagement means building bridges at all levels - not just between governments.
As you know, my vision is for Australia to be the most Asia-literate nation in the collective West.
My vision is that Australians should be able to communicate with our neighbours with understanding and ease.
If we can achieve that goal, we will be better placed to make a contribution to the region and make the most of the opportunities with which its development will present us.
As I have said at this Forum in the past, unless we have the capacity to create an Asia-literate Australia - one which is knowledgeable in the languages of the region and familiar with the principal cultures of the region - the task we face will be very difficult.
Today - as the Prime Minister of this Commonwealth - I reiterate these sentiments.
But the truth is that we, as a nation, are not yet fully equipped to take advantage of the transformation taking place on our doorstep.
On assuming office, my government was faced with the challenge of overcoming years of Asia-literacy neglect under our predecessors.
The Keating Government in the early 1990s implemented the National Asian Languages and Studies in Australian Schools Strategy (NALSAS), to advance the teaching of Asian languages and studies of Asia in Australian schools.
I'm proud to have worked extensively on the establishment of that program.
But I regret that in 2002, the former coalition government axed this program.
A mistake, incidentally, that Tony Abbott has today told you he apparently recognizes he must fix - although he was, of course, a member of the government that cut the program in the first place.
I have always found that 2002 decision inexplicable.
Under NALSAS, the Commonwealth had worked effectively with the States and Territories to almost double Asian language studies enrolments in schools across Australia in the space of six years.
Predictably enough, cancelling this program caused enrolments to crash.
Today I am releasing three new reports commissioned by the Australian Government on the teaching of Asian languages in Australian schools, which complement an earlier University of Melbourne report on Chinese language education.
These reports, prepared by academic experts in conjunction with the Asia Education Foundation, provide the most current data and insight into the state of Japanese, Chinese, Indonesian and Korean language education in Australia.
They clearly demonstrate the scope of the challenge ahead.
They indicate an alarming 22 per cent drop between 2000 and 2008 in the number of Australian students studying one of these four Asian languages from kindergarten to Year 12.
At a time when our Asian literacy should have been growing stronger, it grew weaker.
At a time when more students should have been studying Asian languages, fewer undertook those studies.
This is a trend we must reverse.
And the Australian Government has acted to do so.
In the 2008 Melbourne Declaration on Education Goals for Young Australians, all Australian Education Ministers agreed on the importance of producing young citizens capable of relating to - and communicating across - the cultures and countries of Asia.
The Council of Australian Governments has set an ambitious target:
- that, by 2020, we will increase to at least 12 per cent the number of students leaving Year 12 fluent enough in Chinese, Indonesian, Japanese or Korean to engage in trade and commerce in Asia or university study.
And the Australian Government quickly implemented plans to meet this objective.
In 2008, we committed $62.4 million over four years to a new program aimed at increasing the number of students who take up one of the four key Asian languages.
Implementation of the National Asian Languages and Studies in Schools Program (NALSSP) is progressing well.
There has been strong interest across the education community since the program commenced on 1 January 2009, and states and territories have developed innovative plans to meet the 2020 target.
These include online distance education materials, extended curriculums for advanced students, in-country study tours, student incentives and scholarships, and linking secondary students with young people who are using an Asian language in the workforce.
One of seven projects funded under the NALSSP has enabled Deakin University to open a new Centre for Teaching Asian Languages and Cultures last November.
Recently, a Year 11 student from Queensland wrote to me about his experience of studying in Japan.
His school had received an Asia literacy grant under the NALSSP.
This young student, who had not studied a foreign language until last year, wrote that:
"breaking the language barrier is a difficult thing to do .... I can see this language and others taking a prominent place in my future, as well as many return trips to Japan." 
For this student, among many others including myself, learning an Asian language has not just been about career advancement.
His words demonstrate the discovery of an inner passion for languages that opens doors to understanding.
Clearly, the Government's efforts are having an impact on the lives of young Australians.
But we are committed to doing more.
The new national curriculum recognises the need for young Australians to have the skills, knowledge and understandings to engage with Asia.
I thank the Asia Education Foundation for its continued support for the development of this curriculum.
Of course, Asia literacy is not just about what kids learn in the classroom.
It also means building closer and enduring personal ties between Australia and the region.
This was the motivation behind my announcement last year of the Australia Awards - a new initiative to build the international reputation of our scholarship programs and maximise their benefit to Australia.
This announcement, which I was pleased to make at the National University of Singapore - one of Asia's top ranked universities - was backed by 170 additional Australian scholarships for the region.
In addition, further new scholarships will now be delivered to Asia over coming years as a result of the 2010-11 Budget.
The Australia Awards were inspired by the Colombo Plan, which benefited more than 40,000 people across Asia over 30 years and exported goodwill through an alumni network that endures to this day.
They will build on more than half a million international students who are studying in Australia today.
Last month I was proud to launch a new Australian Centre on China in the World at the ANU - an integrated, world-leading institution for Chinese studies that will serve as a hub for Australian and international scholars.
Mentoring people in the public sector and providing access to a broad community of outstanding scholars, practitioners and the media are crucial to the mission of the new Centre.
We need not only to expand high-level dialogue about China between academics, policy-makers and senior business people.
We must also seek to enhance understanding of China at all levels of Australian society.
Of course, the same principle applies to the other major countries and cultures of our region.
With India, we have built a broad knowledge partnership ranging from collaborative education projects from primary to tertiary level, to joint scientific and technical research - such as a joint solar cooling and mini-grids project between India's Energy and Resources Institute and the CSIRO.
Our joint strategic research fund with India is our largest with any country.
I have said before that Australia needs to do a lot better on Indonesian studies.
In 2008, through AusAID we joined with the Myer Foundation and the Australia-Indonesia Institute to launch a new program to build school-to-school partnerships between Australia and Indonesia.
The BRIDGE program has already brought together 93 schools, 187 teachers and 120,000 students through student exchanges, study tours and online social media such as Facebook, MySpace and Wikispaces.
2008 was a big year for progress on the huge task of strengthening Australia's Asia literacy.
That July, my Malaysian counterpart and I also announced a sister schools program beginning with 12 schools in Malaysia and Victoria.
The program has generated so much interest that it has already doubled in size within two years.
We are also considering the thoughtful recommendations, made in February this year, of a joint Australia-Japan working group on promoting Japanese language education and people-to-people exchanges.
And finally, through institutions such as APEC and the East Asia Summit, we are working to build a regional education community where students and education providers can move between countries with ease.
This Government is committed to deepening our engagement with Asia on all levels - political, economic, defence and people-to-people links.
I am proud of what we have achieved so far.
But I am also the first to acknowledge that overcoming the legacy of Asia-literacy neglect prior to 2007 will take time and resources.
It is, however, something we must invest in - because Asia literacy is an investment in our future.
It is a low-risk, high-yield investment that the Government is pursuing through a diverse portfolio of activities.
I know Sid Myer and Professor Tim Lindsey will say that our investment needs to be far greater.
The work of committed individuals such as Sid and Tim demonstrates that Asia literacy is not a job for government alone.
The diversity of delegates at this conference is testimony to our common stake in building an Australia equipped to meet the opportunities and challenges presented by this new Asian century.
We have representatives from banks and universities.
We have diplomats, health professionals, development experts and artists.
It reveals the true meaning of Asia Pacific community for Australia as a nation.
I wish you success for the remainder of your conference and I look forward to reading your conclusions and recommendations. 


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
And I thank everyone for being here tonight as we celebrate the work of a really great initiative.
Since January 2008, One Laptop Per Child Australia has rolled out more than 1,500 laptops to kids in remote and disadvantaged communities across Australia.
To kids at Jigalong Remote Community School in Western Australia.
At Tullawong School in Queensland.
At Yirrkala School in the Northern Territory, which I had the pleasure to visit a couple of years ago.
And with the aspiration of providing up to 20,000 laptops by 2012, so that all kids have the chance of reaching their full potential, no matter where they live or what school they go to.
This is a really good initiative.
It is what building a stronger, fairer Australia is all about.
Giving children the opportunity to experience a world beyond the boundaries of where they live.
Giving them access to education.
And that's what they can do with these tough little laptops.
The XO is dustproof.
It's waterproof.
It's got a state-of-the-art screen that can be used in the sun.
It's low on energy use.
And it can handle being thrown around or dropped.
Most importantly, it is loaded with educational programs to inspire children to engage with education and connect with digital technology.
Earlier this year, I delivered the progress report on Closing the Gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australia.
And that report made clear that while literacy and numeracy scores varied across grades, Indigenous children are consistently not meeting a minimum standard.
In Year 5 reading, just 63.4 per cent of Indigenous children were at or above the national minimum standard, compared with 92.6 per cent of non-Indigenous children.
In Year 3 numeracy, 96 per cent of non-Indigenous students met or exceeded the standard, but only 78.6 per cent of Indigenous students did.
And the more remote the student, the bigger the gap.
In 2009, the percentage of Indigenous students living in very remote areas who met national minimum standards was as low as 26.4 per cent for Year 5 reading and 21.4 per cent for Year 9 writing.
We can do better.
We must do better.
And we are committed to doing better.
The Australian Government is passionately committed to giving all kids access to the best education possible.
That's why we are investing $2.2 billion to give school students in Years 9 to 12 access to digital technologies, through the Digital Education Revolution initiative.
It's why we are investing $2.5 billion through National Partnership arrangements with states and territories to improve literacy and numeracy, to support sustained teacher quality and to target disadvantaged communities.
It is why we have invested in the biggest school modernisation program the nation has ever seen.
And it is why I am delighted that OLPC Australia is complementing our work through this initiative.
This is practical work, on the ground, where it is vitally needed.
It builds on work that One Laptop Per Child is doing around the globe with disadvantaged children.
It has been made possible by the generous support of corporate partners - the Commonwealth Bank, Telstra and News Ltd - and by donations from ordinary Australians, digging deep into their pockets.
And tonight I can announce that the Government will support OLPC Australia in its fundraising activities.
With the Assistant Treasurer, I am delighted to announce that the Government will amend the income tax law to make donations of $2 or more to OLPC Australia tax deductible.
The decision will be effective from today, subject to public fund requirements.
This is a practical way to support the important work that OLPC Australia is doing to give children the chance to reach their potential.
Kids in Umbakumba.
In Robinson River.
In Nhulunbhuy.
In the words of John Hartigan, "...kids [who] are punished because of their isolation being given an opportunity to get an eye on the world".
OLPC Australia is all about opportunity.
And I thank you for your work.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
I am pleased to be here today, speaking to a joint audience - the opening conference of the National Security College, and the second meeting of the National Security Senior Leadership Forum.
I spoke to the first National Security Leadership Forum in September last year, and I opened the National Security College just last month. Both are initiatives I thoroughly support. Both are essential to building a cooperative and cohesive national security community and culture in Australia.
In December 2008, I delivered the first ever National Security Statement by an Australian Prime Minister to the Australian Parliament.In that statement, I outlined the increasingly complex, fast moving, and inter-connected nature of our national security environment.And I outlined the need for a new, more agile and better integrated and coordinated approach to national security, to face up to the reality of a new global security environment and emerging threats.
Looking back over the past decade, some of the most serious threats to nation states, and to the functioning and integrity of the international system at large, have been from what practitioners would call 'non-traditional' threats.
- The global financial crisis, which posed the most significant threat to the world economy and the institutions that underpin it since the Great Depression. 
- The terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, on the United States and the global violent jihadist movement that went on to carry out or inspire attacks elsewhere, including on Australians. 
Furthermore, there are emerging 'non-traditional' threats to our national security which are not yet fully understood.
- Climate change, which has the real potential to exacerbate, or perhaps in time cause, security challenges.
- Serious organised crime, where the enormous costs to society and economic impacts are becoming more apparent.
The common thread linking all these threats is the challenge they pose to traditional boundaries - between foreign and domestic, between policy and operational and between government and the private sector. The conclusion we have to draw is that any sort of meaningful response must be multi-faceted and highly coordinated. It simply cannot be the preserve of a sole government department or agency.
Today's highly inter-connected, mobile and technology-dependent world has blurred the sorts of classical distinctions that used to exist. It has also increased our vulnerability to disruption because the modern world is made up of many highly complex systems within systems. Each of these systems must operate smoothly to guarantee the life we expect. This has broadened the definition of potential national security threats.
I don't believe for a moment that the traditional challenges of statecraft - managing relations between states, shaping complex geo-strategic systems, or issues of war and peace - will go away. These are enduring features of our national security.
Indeed, the management of Australia's relationships with the major powers, the prosecution of our global interests, our active shaping of the unfolding strategic environment in the Asia-Pacific, and the readiness and capabilities of our defence force are more important to our national security and national prosperity than ever.
But these new, non-traditional challenges have taught us that we cannot afford to sit still when it comes to protecting Australia and Australian interests.
So I am particularly supportive of the theme of today's conference. Amidst these changes and uncertainties, some things must endure. Foremost of these are our national strategic interests:
- our continued territorial integrity and border security;
- our political sovereignty;
- our cohesion and prosperity;
- the interests of Australians at home and abroad; and
- regional stability and a rules-based global order.
Since the first National Security Statement, we've made progress towards achieving a more integrated, whole-of-government approach to national security. An approach that moves seamlessly from domestic to international perspectives, from traditional to non-traditional threats, and that is agile and responsive to today's dynamic and fast-moving security environment. We have created the position of a National Security Adviser - Duncan Lewis - supported by a dedicated Group within the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet.
This position has developed and supported whole-of-government national security policy development and crisis response. It is helping to break down silos and stovepipes between departments and agencies and build a genuinely integrated national security community. In addition to bringing together different threads of the federal government, Duncan's job is also to work with state counterparts and the private sector.
So, as I reminded you all last year, if he calls it will be important and you need to be ready to respond in support. 
For the first time ever this year, as part of the 2010-11 Budget, we brought together all of the national security-related proposals from relevant agencies under a single umbrella - the Coordinated National Security Budget.
The Budget commits us to an investment of $4.3 billion to strengthen our national security, including measures on border security, aviation security, counter-terrorism, identity security, and military stabilisation operations. A coordinated approach to national security funding allows us to weigh options and shift resources across portfolios to best achieve our national security priorities. And it provides a more accurate picture of our overall national security effort in the context of government spending.
Perhaps most importantly, it forces agencies to see their own work in the broader national security context.
This is helping to drive a change in the culture in agencies towards true whole-of-government thinking - because nothing drives cultural change in government like budgets!
We have also taken a number of steps to build the national security community.
Here at ANU we have established the National Security College, which will quickly become a central institution in our emerging approach towards national security policy. The College will equip the next generation of leaders with the knowledge and skills needed to navigate our more complex national security environment. Over time it will build up expertise across government, foster collaborative leadership, and replace any remaining silos with trusted networks of interaction within the national security community.
We have established a National Intelligence Coordination Committee, chaired by the National Security Adviser, to ensure our national intelligence effort is effectively integrated and aligned with our national security priorities.
We have taken steps to improve information sharing within the community.
The National Security Information Environment Roadmap: 2020 has now been publicly released. The Roadmap provides - for the first time - a single strategy to address the barriers to information sharing, articulates a clear end-point, and dismantles some outdated notions of information 'stovepipes' and 'need to know'.
Last year, we released the first National Security Science and Innovation Strategy. The strategy embraces the full breadth of national security threats arising from rapid changes to the technological capabilities of potential adversaries, and sets out ways to improve the application of science and innovation to strengthen our national security.
We released the Counter-Terrorism White Paper which, for the first time, brought together the international and domestic elements of our counter-terrorism policy into one document.
We are building the AFP's overseas network and using the AFP's expertise more in stabilisation operations throughout the region.
We are creating a civilian response corps to enable the rapid deployment of Australian civilians into overseas disaster or conflict zones.
We have created the Asia-Pacific Civil-Military Centre of Excellence to improve our civil-military capabilities and our ability to respond effectively to overseas conflicts and disasters.
Finally, we are doing more to actively consult and engage stakeholders outside the traditional Federal Government national security community, such as state and territory governments, business, industry and academia.
I would like to speak today about how these changes impact on you - the practitioners of national security.
Today, this audience is broader than the one at the National Security Executive Leadership course last year. This year we have all the key commonwealth agencies here - Defence, Attorney-Generals, DFAT, the AFP, and others. Like last year, we have representatives from state government agencies. But this year there are also leaders of the business community, academics and commentators present. This is an important evolution.
As domestic and international events, impacts and influences become increasingly blurred in the complex modern world, we need to look beyond the confines of government when considering national security and how we respond to national security challenges.
Perhaps this is most clearly seen in the need to protect critical infrastructure from terrorism, and ensure the continuity of essential services in the face of all hazards. For our economic and social well-being in the modern world, we rely on key infrastructure. Telecommunications networks. The electricity grid. Financial systems. Traffic systems - in the air, on the ground and at sea.
A disruption to any one of these systems would have a devastating impact on our lives and livelihoods. Just look at the effect of one volcano in Iceland. The cost of air travel being grounded by that cloud of volcanic ash over Europe is estimated to be a loss of 1.5 billion Euros for the airline industry and a further 1 billion Euros for the tourism sector in Europe. The follow-on impacts would have been even greater.
Over the past year, there have been some significant shifts in our thinking around critical infrastructure. 
For a number of years, the focus of governments around the country has been very much on protecting critical infrastructure from terrorist attack.
But as I said in the National Security Statement, national security is much broader than that. It is about protecting Australia and Australians from all hazards, be they man-made or natural. In line with this change in thinking, we are broadening the way we secure Australia's critical infrastructure. If we are to bolster our infrastructure against a hazard or disaster of any kind, we can no longer write policies or promote risk assessments aimed at protecting it against a specific hazard. Instead, we must enhance the 'resilience' of our critical infrastructure - that is, the capacity for it to withstand and recover from all emergencies and disasters. This resilience must involve all sectors of society - including all levels of government, business, the non-government sector and individuals.
As you would know, all of the systems in Australia - all of our infrastructure - cross a number of boundaries. They may cross international boundaries and call up questions of sovereignty. They almost certainly cross state boundaries in Australia and raise questions of jurisdiction. But they also cross boundaries between the public and the private. Ownership and operation of the assets that lie at the base of these systems is neither wholly private nor wholly government. The continued operation of infrastructure may rely partly on government control, and partly on industry-led standards. But it is also dependent on an effective business-government partnership.
Because of our reliance on critical infrastructure, its preservation, protection and resilience to all hazards becomes a matter of national security.The questions for all of us here today therefore are:
- how do we provide security for our infrastructure;
- what is our role in providing security; and 
- how do we work together - with all stakeholders - to achieve that security?
Answers to these questions are complex. But let me give you some concrete examples of what I am talking about.
There are a couple of organisations that most of you in Canberra would know of, but some in the business community might not know much about.
They are the Cyber Security Operations Centre in the Defence Signals Directorate, and the Computer Emergency Response Team Australia, or CERT Australia as it is known, in the Attorney General's Department.
Both of these organisations are full of computer boffins. And one of their key tasks is to assist in the protection of Australia's computer networks.
Earlier this year we opened the Cyber Security Operations Centre in DSD, which was the first time we let the media into DSD. The Centre brings together representatives from the relevant government agencies, including ASIO, the AFP, Attorney-General's and, of course, Defence, to sit in one location and monitor and support our government networks to keep them safe, secure and operating. When fully operational, the Centre will maintain a 24/7 watch on cyber activities that might threaten Australia's national security. It will provide the Australian Government with a better understanding of the cyber threat. It will coordinate responses to cyber security events of national importance.
But Government networks do not operate in a purely government environment. They all work closely with commercial telecommunications systems. So an important part of the Centre's job is to engage with the telecommunications providers and open lines of communication about the challenges we collectively face. In the event of a threat or sophisticated attack against the non-government sector, the Centre collaborates with industry through CERT Australia.
CERT Australia provides cyber security information and advice for the Australian public and business community. Particularly, owners and operators of systems of national importance and critical infrastructure. To date, CERT Australia and its predecessor GovCERT have briefed around 500 companies on sophisticated cyber threats. This reflects the fact that protecting national security means getting out there to industry and having frank conversations about the cyber threats we face. It means talking to telecommunications companies and finance companies about data and how it is protected. It means working out where the shared vulnerabilities are and how we can work to overcome them.
Cyber-security illustrates the point that government and industry need to work with each other to provide the security and stability we need for our infrastructure.You are all stakeholders in that security. You are all critical to providing it. There are, however, some areas of national security where the government will always be the main player.
National defence is the responsibility of the Federal Government.We published the first Defence White Paper in nearly a decade last year. It was the result of a rigorous process of assessing the military threats we might we face, and how we would have to deal with them.
The result was a plan - Force 2030 - to build by 2030 a defence force with more capabilities to meet the changing environment in our region. And it entailed a commitment to stable and predictable funding for the Department of Defence for the next 20 years. We are committed to ensuring that Australia has the ability to defend its territory. Of course, preparing defence forces is only part of the equation for securing the nation. The other side is to shape the regional and global environment so that it develops in ways favourable to us and our interests.
It is for that reason that this government has been unashamedly active in global and international affairs. Making sure that our voice is heard as the world's major economies shape the response to the global financial crisis is as much a matter of national security as is buying the right tanks. Being active in the G20 over the past two years has helped to protect our core national economic interests.
For a nation like Australia that lies at the Western edge of the Pacific and the South Eastern edge of Asia, the decades ahead will bring a lot of change. China is rising. India is emerging. The United States continues to predominate. Other major powers in the region are seeking to secure their futures.
In this environment, the government's view is that, in addition to strong relationships with key partners, we also need to help develop the right institutions that will help us manage any friction as power relativities change. That is why I have spoken about an Asia Pacific community.
This is a straightforward concept of ensuring that the leaders of all of the key nations in the region can get together periodically with a mandate to discuss all the challenges our nations face - political, economic, environmental, or strategic. We have no such body at the moment. Our view is that having one would be in our national interest. And we welcome recent statements from around the region that reflect a recognition of the need for our regional institutions to embrace the wider mandate and membership that our regional institutions need to meet further challenges.
Just as we need at home to build new partnerships to help us manage the complexities of the modern security environment, we need to do the same things in the evolving, complex international security space as well.
Taking stock almost a year and a half on from the National Security Statement, I think we have gone some significant way towards creating a single and unified national security community. We are on the way to building a national security community that is better equipped, coordinated and integrated, and that is able to respond more effectively to the full spectrum of national security threats. But there is much more to be done.
If there is one lesson to take from today, it is the need for continual evaluation and improvement in the way we approach national security. We not only need to be mindful of emerging security threats, but also mindful of new ways to respond to them. And in particular, we need to be mindful that significant assets exist outside government which can make an important contribution to our national security.
Businesses own or operate a significant portion of our critical infrastructure, and have a great deal of knowledge and expertise of the domestic and international environment. Academics and think tanks can offer valuable insights and perspectives, from outside the bubble of government, that can inform better policy. Opinion and community leaders can do much to build social resilience and cohesion, important national assets. It is important that, as leaders of the national security community, you all work together to secure the nation. And I congratulate you all on your participation in these courses as building the national security community.
I thank you.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
Thank you for the invitation to join you this morning. This year is an historic year for health reform. Right now, the Government is involved in a significant national economic debate: a debate about economic management and economic responsibility; how we build a stronger Australian economy into the future; how we ensure all Australians share in the benefits of our natural resource wealth.
This debate is ongoing and the Australian Government will be out there, making the case for significant tax reform, between now and the election. 
Amidst that national debate, we are continuing the fundamentally important work of national health reform. This work cannot wait. Our health and hospitals system is at a tipping point, as the National Health and Hospitals Reform Commission said last year. The pressures of rising demand, an ageing population and the increased costs of medical technology in coming years will push it beyond that tipping point if we do not.
That is why the Australian Government has taken on the great challenge of building a 21st century national health and hospitals network. Last month we concluded an historic agreement on health reform at COAG. As I said at the end of that meeting - our work has only just begun.
In this historic year, I want to acknowledge the contribution that the Australian Medical Association has made to the health policy debate - and the contribution the AMA has made to the Government's national health reform agenda; reforms that are long overdue; reforms that health professionals have told the Australian Government are needed - so that Australia has a strong, modern and sustainable health care system for the 21st century.
Today I will make remarks on three matters.
First, I will discuss how the Government is addressing the priorities for health care reform identified by the AMA.
Second, I will make an important announcement on strengthening the role of doctors in providing clinical leadership in our hospitals.
Third, I will address the importance of general practices in the Government's plans for the National Health and Hospitals Network.
On 16 September last year, Andrew Pesce presented the Government with the AMA's Priority Investment Plan at our consultation with the AMA and the medical colleges. This was the first of many discussions that Nicola Roxon and I have had with Andrew in addressing these priorities as part of our national health reform agenda.
The key change the doctors have been calling for is an end to the blame game between the Commonwealth and States over the funding of our public hospitals. The Australian Government has acted on that call with our blueprint for the National Health and Hospitals Network that is nationally funded and locally run.
Under our reform plan, the Commonwealth becomes the majority funder of public hospitals and will pay a fixed majority share - that is, 60 per cent of the efficient price of every hospital service, set by an independent umpire, to take the politics out of health funding.
This will end the five-yearly cycle of Commonwealth and State governments finger-pointing at each other over hospital funding. It will ensure that the Commonwealth contribution to public hospitals is permanently linked to health service demand and increases in cost.
In addition, as the majority funder the Commonwealth will no longer have an incentive to cost-shift into the hospital system. The Commonwealth will ensure that patients have appropriate access to high quality GP services in the community, because it will otherwise foot the bill for more expensive hospital care.
Doctors also called for more investment. The Australian Government is investing an additional $7.3 billion in the health system over five years. We are addressing problems in the health system that have been of longstanding concern to the AMA:
- $750 million to support the staged introduction of a four-hour National Access Target to reduce emergency department waiting times. 
- $800 million to support a National Access Target for 95 per cent of Australians to receive elective surgery in clinically recommended times.
- $1.6 billion to fund more than 1,300 new sub-acute care beds - and, to address concerns raised by the AMA that this increased funding could just be lost in bureaucracies, the COAG Agreement will specifically require States and Territories to actually increase bed numbers. 
- $120 million for capital investments for around 286 additional places in multi-purpose services.
The way hospitals will be funded aligns directly with what the AMA called for in its priority investment plan. Hospitals will be funded through a single source - a National Health and Hospitals Network Funding Authority, which in each state will combine Commonwealth and State funding.
There has been a lot of conjecture about the significance of the COAG agreement and arrangements for how hospitals are funded. The COAG agreement goes further than our original reform blueprint by requiring that full transparency will apply not only to Commonwealth funding of hospital services, but State and Territory funding as well.
I welcome this as a change for the better. For the first time Australians will be able to see transparently how their hospitals are funded from both levels of Government - and how funds dedicated to health are spent.
The AMA also called for national targets and performance monitoring - and in each of these key areas - the National Health and Hospitals Network has delivered.
The AMA also called for greater clinical input into our hospital system. This is the second matter I wish to address today.
During the past year I have had hundreds of conversations with doctors, nurses and other health professionals in hospitals across the nation. One of the most common messages I heard was that doctors feel locked out from decision making on the ground in hospitals where they work.
A key reform in the new National Health and Hospitals Network is the establishment of Local Hospital Networks, which put clinicians and local communities back at the centre of delivering hospital services. Local Hospital Networks will be responsible for running hospitals - instead of State Health Departments, Area Health Services and the other centralised models in place today.
Clinical leadership will be an integral part of Local Hospital Networks. Today I want to make an important announcement about how we will achieve this goal.
The COAG agreement we have secured will put in place the structure that clinicians have sought - a locally run system, with decisions located closer to local doctors, nurses and allied health professionals, and today I am pleased to announce that we will reinforce this new structure with a financial commitment.
The Government will invest $58 million to establish Lead Clinicians Groups in Local Hospital Networks and at a national level.
This is an investment in better leadership for better hospitals and better healthcare.
Locally, Lead Clinicians Groups will guide Local Hospital Networks on:
- how national best practice is best delivered locally. 
- how we can best improve quality and safety; 
- service planning and the most efficient allocation of clinical services within the Network, and
- developing innovative solutions that best address the needs of local communities.
These Groups will be made up of local health professionals - doctors, nurses and allied health professionals drawn from within each Network. Some States have already moved in this direction and we will work with them and professionals on making sure this commitment is complementary.
This Government is committed to ensuring that Local Hospital Networks turn to the expertise of their Lead Clinicians in determining how they can best deliver on the tough national standards we will be seeking. I have already made clear that clinicians will be represented on Local Hospital Network Governing Councils.
We want to ensure that clinicians have confidence in the Governing Council, and that clinical representatives are the best people for the job. This Government believes that local clinicians will often be the best people for the job - and Local Lead Clinician Groups will also be approached to nominate clinicians to sit on the Governing Council of their Local Hospital Network.
In addition to the local groups, the Government will also establish National Lead Clinicians Groups to develop and encourage the use of evidence based clinical guidelines. They will help set national standards - which local Lead Clinicians Groups can translate into best practice in communities' right across the country.
As a result of these measures, at both a National and Local level - doctors, nurses and allied health professionals will have a permanent and influential voice in our health and hospitals system. This is an important reform of the governance of our health system and I believe it will deliver safer, higher quality health care, to the benefit of patients and their families.
We look forward to working with the AMA on the development and implementation of Lead Clinicians Groups, as we work to ensure that medical professionals play the fullest possible role in shaping the healthcare system of the future.
Together with the changed funding arrangements outlined above, local clinical engagement represents a key reform in delivering a nationally funded and locally run healthcare system for the future.
The third matter I want to address today is how we provide for better General Practice and primary health care.
As the majority funder of the entire health system, the Commonwealth now has a direct financial incentive - one that it has never had before - to help Australians stay healthy and out of hospitals. That can be achieved through improving GP and primary care, better prevention and investing in electronic health records.
Less than a month after reforms were agreed with the States, the Commonwealth rounded out its health reform agenda with a $1.2 billion investment in GP and primary care. This investment is a reflection of a new era in healthcare in Australia - where the Commonwealth has the incentive to improve primary care, based on international evidence that better primary care delivers better health outcomes.
This all starts with having high-quality, well-trained medical staff, and if we're to build the health workforce we need for the future, we need to make the right long-term investments, as the AMA has long argued.
The Australian Government has announced a $1.2 billion investment to train more doctors, nurses and allied health professionals.
- This includes 1,375 more general practitioners practising or in training by 2013, and 5,500 new GPs or GPs undergoing training over the next decade. 
- It will provide for 680 more specialist doctors over the next decade. 
- And it will deliver 975 places each year for junior doctors to experience a career in general practice during their postgraduate training period.
This package is the single largest expansion of Australia's health workforce in Australian history. The AMA has played a key role in the design of the health workforce plan, and we appreciate that work.
The Government recognises that GPs are at the heart of primary care services in Australia and we want to provide you with the extra support you need deliver the best possible care for your patients. We will support GPs expand their practice and deliver additional services by investing $355 million to upgrade 425 existing general practices and primary care facilities across the country, and to provide a further 23 GP Super Clinics.
Over the coming weeks, the Government will be opening the first round of applications and I remain hopeful that the Opposition will decide to support this policy.
We will also provide $390 million to expand support for around 4,600 full time equivalent nurses working in general practice in a major boost to primary care. For this first time, GPs in urban areas will be eligible for funding to help employ practice nurses. This will mean general practices are provided with annual incentive payments of $25,000 per full time GP for a registered nurse and $12,500 per full time GP per enrolled nurse.
The Government will also invest $449 million to improve care for people with diabetes. This will mean that where patients diagnosed with diabetes and their doctors choose - they will have the option of enrolling at a GP practice to help them access a range of additional services.
Practices will be able to use this funding flexibly to support general practices in helping tailor care around the needs of individual patients. We will ensure that patients will continue to be able to see any GP of their choice - for example, if they are on holiday in a different city.
This model represents a significant change in how patient care for diabetes is funded, and we will continue to discuss the detail of this policy with the AMA.
The Government will complement its investment in empowering local clinicians to have more of a say in running local hospitals by establishing a network of locally-run Medicare Locals. Medicare Locals will support GPs and primary care organisations in improving access to health services in the community, and driving integration with Local Hospital Networks and aged care services.
For instance, a Medicare Local, in consultation with GPs, might identify that there is a substantial need for mental health services in an area - and organise a roster of allied health professionals such as psychologists to provide sessional services across a number of GP clinics.
Planning and management of individual patient's care will remain the responsibility of their GP and Medicare Locals will help complement services provided by GPs. For example, Medicare Locals will play a key role in improving access to GP services after hours.
Each of these investments will directly improve services today, but to keep Australians healthy into the future, we need to counter the high and increasing rates of chronic disease, much of which is avoidable. That's why the Australian Government is making the largest ever investment in preventative health.
In 2008 we delivered an $872 million investment. We are also tackling the lifestyle risks that contribute to rising rates of chronic disease - smoking, excessive alcohol consumption and obesity.
Last month the Government increased the tobacco excise by 25 per cent. The increased revenues from tobacco excise, along with existing revenues, will be directly invested in increased health funding. We will also require plain packaging for cigarettes from 2012 - the world's toughest tobacco packaging regime.
We have also taken action to curb excessive alcohol consumption. In our first Budget, we raised the excise on ready-mixed drinks, the so-called alcopops that have been particularly associated with youth binge drinking.
When we announced this policy, there was fierce resistance from a big industry. They ran ads. They ran misleading scare campaigns. They campaigned for our political opponents. They said the policy wouldn't work. But we pressed ahead and yesterday the Bureau of Statistics confirmed the success of this policy.
The statistics for 2008-09 show that after four years when alcohol consumption in Australia was increasing year after year - in 2009 we saw a small decline. The main reason for that decline was a 30 per cent decrease in ready to drink or pre-mixed beverages. Per capita consumption of pure alcohol by persons aged 15 years and over also decreased from 10.32 litres to 10.08 litres.
The Bureau of Statistics noted that this was chiefly a result of:
"a fall in the apparent consumption of alcohol of ready to drink (pre-mixed) beverages which more than accounts for the increases in beer, wine and spirits".
This conclusion shows that the Liberal Party were led astray on opposing good tax reform by the alcopop industry and today we see them making the same mistake with sections of the mining industry.
Another critical step in preparing our entire health system for the demands of the future is to improve the accuracy and accessibility of patient health records. The AMA rightly identified e-health as an investment priority last year, and the Government has committed $467 million to establish an electronic health record system. This will provide all Australians with the option of a personally controlled electronic health record.
As doctors you know that electronic health records will help you deliver better health care. Patient information will be more accurate. You won't need to order unnecessary extra tests, chase information from other health providers or require patients to recall their medical history.
It will mean better access to hospital discharge summaries, test results and details of prescribed medications, and reduced adverse drug events and medication errors. It will also enable better and safer care, and smoother transitions between hospital care and care in the community.
This is a critical component of long-term health reform and the Government urges the Opposition to reconsider its plan to scrap investment in e-health records.
I welcome the AMA's ongoing and crucial role in rolling out the National Health and Hospitals Network.
Securing agreement for the National Health and Hospitals Network was a major challenge. It meant putting major health reform on the national agenda; it meant bringing the States and Territories to the table; and it required an unprecedented process of consultation with patients, health professionals and experts across Australia.
The medical professions played a critical role in the consultation process, and they played a critical role in the shape of our reforms which will deliver more beds, funding for public hospitals from a single source and greater clinical leadership.
But it is the next stage where the rubber hits the road - in the implementation of these reforms. I look forward to working with the AMA to get the most out of our investments in health and hospitals and the most out of these reforms to the benefit of all Australians. 


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
Today we gather to make a down payment on one of the nation's most fundamental obligations - to protect the health of its citizens.
And in the field of medicine, no killer is more challenging or more destructive than cancer.
Cancer will touch one in three of us.
I've been touched by cancer.
My mum died of lung cancer.
And brain cancer killed my good friend, the late Professor Chris O'Brien - one of the most gifted Australians of our time.
Each year, more than 100,000 Australians sit down with their doctor and hear the devastating verdict that they have cancer.
And 600 of those are children.
Each year, 40,000 Australians lose their fight against cancer.
That's 26 times the number who die on our roads every year.
To transform cancer care, we need better coordination and more investment.
We have to break down silos and translate research into practice.
We have to mobilise the resources and commitment of governments.
Our National Plan for Better Cancer Care is about better services today, and developing the research base for the future - backed with over $2.3 billion in funding since the Government took office.
One of the things that most struck me is that Australians living in our rural and regional areas are three times more likely to die from some cancers than their counterparts in major cities.
That's why we're investing in 20 regional cancer care projects around the country - including eight new regional cancer care centres, upgrades to seven existing facilities, and four patient accommodation projects.
It's why we will ensure that these regional cancer centres will have links and referral pathways to the two integrated cancer centres - Lifehouse at RPA and the Parkville Comprehensive Cancer Centre in Melbourne - to set the gold standard for our nation.
This is a core part of the biggest reforms to our health and hospitals since the introduction of Medicare.
Reforms to deliver a health and hospitals system that is nationally funded and locally run.
But no matter how much we improve services, our current treatments - surgery, chemo and radiotherapy - have their limitations.
To take us further we need research.
And that is where the Lowy Centre will come into its own.
This Centre rests on two foundations.
The first is the generosity of a great Australian, Frank Lowy and
his family.
And the second is a dedicated partnership between:
- the University of New South Wales;
- the Children's Cancer Institute Australia;
- the Australian Cancer Research Foundation;
- the NSW and Australian Governments; and 
- a group of selfless Capital Appeal Donors.
The Australian Government made a significant contribution to this Centre - $13.3 million.
And the Commonwealth, through the National Health and Medical Research Council, has provided the University of NSW with $45 million in cancer research funding over the past five years - $11.9 million in 2010 alone.
This will support our cancer researchers - who are opening new frontiers every day.
Look at the work of Ian Frazer and his colleagues in developing Gardasil.
Not only have they have they saved generations of women from the misery of cervical cancer.
They have given renewed hope to the research community that one day we can master cancer - just like our forebears defeated TB, polio and smallpox.
The very same hope inspires and animates this centre.
Like the work of Dr Kerrie McDonald and her team tackling the growing incidence of brain tumours.
Or Professor Philip Hogg's work on proteins that has led to two new anti-cancer drugs which are currently being trialled.
That is the quality we have here at the Lowy Centre - 400 of the nation's brightest.
It is especially fitting that we honour the Lowy family's generosity the week, marking - as it does - the 50th anniversary of Westfield.
History will not only record Frank Lowy as an astute businessman but also a generous one.
Think of his contribution to international affairs through the Lowy Institute.
His support for the 'beautiful game' and our FIFA World Cup bid.
His dedication to the Jewish community and to Israel.
And his backing for innovation and education:
- the Lowy Packer building at the Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute,
- and the new Lowy Library at the Australian Graduate School of Management, to name but two of Frank's recent contributions.
Today we add another project to that proud list.
A place that is one of the largest dedicated cancer research centres in the Southern Hemisphere - and also one of the best.
A place that will be at forefront of our fight to unravel - and in time defeat - this cruel and savage disease.
With those thoughts in mind, I honour the Lowy family and our other partners for their vision and generosity.
I thank the Centre's staff for their dedication and care.
I thank the architects, contractors and workers who brought this building to fruition during tough economic times.
And with pride and confidence, I declare the Lowy Cancer Research Centre officially open.


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
The story of the Australian Labor Party is a story of hope triumphing over fear. 
It is also our nation's story. Our nation's past, and our nation's future. 
A continuing narrative throughout Australia's history that says it is better to build up than to tear down. That it is better to build the nation, than to wait for someone else to build the nation for us. That it is better to create opportunity for all, rather than tolerate opportunity for the few. That it is better to face the future, than to fear the future. 
The story of Labor is a story of the triumph of hope over fear. A story that says afresh to each generation that we can build a better Australia. 
A stronger Australia. A fairer Australia. An Australia in which all our families can aspire to a better future. And an Australia that proudly raises its independent voice in the councils of the world in the belief that together, we can also build a better world. 
Friends, this is the continuing mission of Labor. 
These are the continuing values of Labor. This is the continuing purpose of Labor. 
Hope triumphing over fear. 
Friends, the work of the Australian Labor Party is never complete. Each age, and each generation, brings new challenges and new opportunities.
As we prepare for those challenges, we do well to learn from the achievements of past Labor governments:
- Nation-building endeavours to build a stronger Australia.
- Social reforms to build a fairer Australia.
- Tackling the hard, long-term challenges in our economy, in health care, in education and in national security - so that we pass on to the next generation more than we inherited from the last.
Labor is the party of reform.
The party that has driven economic reform for a century and more. The party that has delivered social progress for a century and more. And if we sometimes fall short of what we aspire to be, our party is defined by a set of values that always brings us back to Labor's core purpose. The enduring spirit that runs through successive Labor governments, from generation to generation. 
Chifley called it the light on the hill.
The betterment of all Australians. 
Andrew Fisher half a century earlier had spoken of the vision to give "the typical labourer... the fairest condition of life; the fullest opportunity to rise in life" 
And this is what Labor has always stood for. 
Removing the barriers that hold people back; creating the opportunities that take people forward; giving every Australian the freedom to fulfil their potential; and working ceaselessly for the common good of all. 
Tonight we remember the historic election of the Fisher Labor Government on 13 April 1910. 
An election where Labor won 42 seats to the Opposition's 31 seats - as well as every one of the 18 vacant Senate seats. 
A path-breaking election that brought the first majority Labor Government into office in history. 
An election that proved Labor could govern - govern responsibly, and govern successfully .
The man who made that possible was Andrew Fisher.
By any objective standard, Fisher stands tall in the pantheon of great Labor leaders. In every sense he stands as a Labor great alongside Curtin and Chifley. Fisher made Labor an effective national political force.
He built foundations for ongoing political success - and without the split over conscription, Labor might well have dominated politics in the decades that followed. Indeed, had he stayed in office the party split over conscription would never have occurred. 
Andrew Fisher was of course a proud son of Scotland and devotee of the poetry of Robbie Burns. 
But his is a profoundly Australian story.
The story of a modest man who started his working life at the age of nine in the coal pits of Ayrshire in Scotland - but rose to lead his party into government with an historic parliamentary majority.
He endured many hardships throughout his life. His years as a miner left lasting damage to his health. For representing workers as a union leader, he was blacklisted by mine owners from the coalfields of Ayrshire to the goldfields of Gympie. His highest qualification was an engine driver's certificate. But he was never intimidated by his lack of formal education.
Fisher was taught to read from the Bible.
He had none of the pedigree or the opportunity of his conservative contemporaries - men like Barton, a former student of Sydney Grammar and Sydney University; Reid, from Sydney High and Sydney University; and Deakin, from Melbourne Grammar and Melbourne University.
Fisher was not an ideologue.
But he was animated by a profound sense of justice, a deep religious faith, a powerful sense of public service, a prodigious work ethic - and an extraordinary tenacity.
He travelled more than any other politician of his generation. According to his biographer:
"In one 28 day trip around Queensland, he covered nearly 5,600 kilometres and visited 36 towns, using train, coach, buggy, horseback and even a railway tricycle. He received over 60 deputations, attended 51 meetings, and on one day alone, spoke some 14 times."
When he lost his seat in the Queensland Parliament in 1896, largely due to a vicious newspaper campaign against him, he went out and started up his own workers' newspaper, the Gympie Truth. 
His determination was unequalled. 
Fisher embodied the heart and soul of the new Australian Labor Party. 
In Scotland, he had worked alongside Keir Hardie, founder of the British Labour Party and its first leader. 
In Queensland, he saw the dawn of the Australian Labor Party in 1891. He was among the first group of Labor candidates elected to the Queensland parliament in 1893. He served in the world's first Labor government, in Queensland in 1899. He sat in the first Australian parliament, as the member for Wide Bay from 1901. And he wrote his own page in history by leading Labor to victory in 1910 - the first majority Labor government in the world, and later becoming our first wartime Prime Minister. 
Andrew Fisher was above all a nation-builder. 
He took on a colossal program of work, and he left the legacy of a strong, effective national government. 
He knew that nationhood required national leadership, national infrastructure, national institutions, uniform standards and a sense of collective national identity and shared progress. 
He recognised what his times required. 
Fisher understood the importance of prudence and fiscal responsibility - so he worked hard to sustain a strong budget position, and avoided debt until it was made inevitable by war. 
He believed Australia should not rely on using the British currency - so he established a national currency and a publicly owned Commonwealth Bank. 
He believed a national economy required national infrastructure that linked the entire continent - so he built the east-west railway and established uniform postal rates. 
He believed Australia had outgrown the time when its defence forces should simply be divisions of the British armed forces - so he strengthened national defences, established the Royal Australian Navy and Duntroon military training college, and in later years he was tireless in promoting the Anzac legacy. 
He knew a decision needed to be made on choosing a national capital so he selected Canberra for the Australian Capital Territory.
He believed a decent society must support those unable to work, so he led the efforts to establish the age and invalid pensions. 
He knew the dangers of unsafe workplaces from seeing many friends and loved ones lose life or limb at work - so he fought passionately for workers' compensation schemes both in Queensland and Federal Parliaments.
He'd seen how many women were so poor they couldn't even afford to have a doctor present when they were giving birth - so he established the first maternity allowance - the 'baby bonus'. 
He believed the new nation needed to develop its own sense of cultural identity, so he supported Australian artists, and laid foundations for key cultural institutions like the national library and national art collections, as well as establishing a new national coat of arms that remains in place today. 
And he fought persistently for social progress - 
- for women's suffrage;
- for voting reforms that empowered working people - he is, for example, the reason we hold our elections on Saturdays - so working people are not hindered in exercising their democratic rights; and
- for land reforms to discourage speculators and to make housing more affordable. 
Fisher's record of achievement is breathtaking. 
It may have been even greater had it not been for the outbreak of war, and the truculence of a very conservative High Court. 
But even so, Fisher - and the Labor leaders who followed him - were crucial to Australia's greatest achievement. 
The creation of this exceptional nation.
A nation built from a motley collectivity of souls, drawn from all corners of the earth; a nation that became a stable and successful democracy, that carved its living from an inhospitable earth to build one of the most prosperous nations on earth - rich in innovation, rich in enterprise; a nation that has so often led the world in social progress that it became one of the most open, most progressive, least class-based societies in the world.
A nation that believes in everyone having a go, and a nation that also believes in everyone getting a fair go. 
A nation that celebrates success, hard work and individual achievement; a nation that rewards achievements both in the workplace and the market place.
A generous country and community, confident of its place in the region and in the world - straddling uniquely the challenges and complexities of our Indigenous antiquity, our European history and our Asian geography.
Each and every generation of Australians is confronted by the challenge of whether they take forward the project of building this stronger, fairer, better Australia, or whether they retreat to a more divided, insular, less generous Australia - one stuck in the past, fearing the future, and railing against the uncertainties of a changing world. 
Andrew Fisher answered that challenge for his generation.
He took Australia forward. 
He laid the foundations of nationhood for our modern economy, our defences and our great social institutions, foundations on which we are still building today.
As heirs to the great legacy of Andrew Fisher and those who have followed him this last one hundred years, the challenge for us today is to answer history's call for our generation.
To build Australia's future, upon the strong foundations of the past. 
Just as Fisher helped build Australia's future for the 20th century, so we must shape Australia for the 21st century. 
As a government, we came to office with an ambitious agenda because we believe Australian families deserved better - better opportunities, better health and hospitals, better schools and a better workplace. 
When we were all threatened by the global financial crisis, we acted decisively to support Australian families. 
I was determined to shield Australians from an economic cyclone that would have seen hundreds of thousands of Australians lose their jobs, their homes and their businesses.
We took decisive action, and Australia has come through stronger than almost every other advanced economy.
Throughout that crisis, we were determined to sustain Australians' essential confidence in our future as confidence collapsed around the world.
This is the point of everything we are doing.
Because without confidence in our future, the nation turns in on itself. 
In Government, I have strived to remove the obstacles and expand opportunities, so that no Australian is held back from fulfilling their potential. I have sought to support the daily efforts of individuals, families and communities around the country as they work hard, raise kids, build businesses, create communities - and through both success and adversity, sustain hope in their future. 
That's why we acted to end Work Choices.
That's why we supported families with:
- three years of tax cuts;
- with extra help for the costs of child care;
- with extra help for the costs of school; 
- a better health and hospitals system for the future; 
- driving our education revolution to deliver the best educated, best trained, best skilled workforce anywhere in the world. 
In Government we have always aimed to deliver a big reform agenda, and there are times when we have run into difficulties, when we haven't achieved everything we set out to do, and when we are working hard to deal with those areas where we have fallen short. 
Our task - and Labor's historic task - is to give people the security they need to achieve their ambitions and realise their dreams.
Now as we look beyond 2010, we're determined to continue the job we began for Australian families. 
Delivering not just on the big picture, but on the things that count for families and communities as well.
We're getting the budget back to surplus in three years time - three years ahead of time - to keep the economy strong. Through strong economic management, we're halving net peak debt. 
We're already funding 1,000 new nurse training places every year. We'll have an additional 1,300 GPs qualified or in training by 2013.
We're currently delivering Trade Training Centres for 732 schools and over the next three years we'll ensure another 520 schools have access to one.
And despite setbacks delivered by an obstructionist Senate, we're tackling climate change by boosting the renewable energy target and supporting record renewable energy investment, and by building one of the world's largest solar power plants, right here in Australia.
Andrew Fisher faced daunting challenges in 1910.
We face daunting challenges today. 
To secure our nation's future, we must continue to adapt and change. 
We must keep our markets open because open markets maximise competition which in turn maximise growth. 
We must modernise Australia's industries and institutions to generate the jobs of tomorrow rather than believing we can somehow snap-freeze the past. 
To stand still is to go backwards. 
Open markets by contrast are dynamic. 
We must invest in roads, railways, ports and broadband.
Fisher began a trans-Australia railway to build a truly national economy. We will build a National Broadband Network to underpin the national economy of the future. 
Above all, we must invest in our people - in their education, their health and in the strength of their community.
This isn't just about our national economy, the skills of our workforce, or the competitiveness of our industries.
It is about lifting our nation's ambitions for the future, and calling forth the best from all Australians. 
Not just for ourselves individually, not just for our families, but also for the common good, the 'commonwealth' of all Australians.
That's why Labor has always been the party of reform.
Building a stronger Australia.
Building a fairer Australia.
And making the tough decisions for the future.
As we prepare for the 2010 election, echoes from 1910 reverberate down through the generations.
Labor, with a vision to build our nation up. The conservative parties, with the aim only to tear things down.
Labor, building Australia up with a nation-building agenda. The Liberal Party, just wanting to tear things down. 
Tear down the most basic protection from unfair dismissal; tear down the modernisation of our schools; tear down the historic reform of the national health and hospital network; rip up a national broadband network. 
We stand for a strong economy - they have said instead they would have sent us into recession. 
We stand for delivering a surplus three years early - they have no plan to return the Budget to surplus. 
We stand for a decent safety net - they would bring back WorkChoices and AWAs. 
We stand for better health and better hospitals - they stand for ripping billions out of the public hospital system. 
We stand for the mining industry paying its fair share for the people's resources - they say the mining industry pays too much tax. 
We stand for building something that lasts out of the soaring commodity prices and the second round of the mining boom - they stand for squandering it, just like they did last time round. 
We stand for better super for working families - they stand for ripping away that extra super. 
We stand for tax cuts for Australian business - they stand for tax increases for Australian business. 
We stand for the biggest increase in the pension in its one hundred year history - they stand for increasing the aged pension age to 70. 
These are just some of the differences between us. 
In 2010, the Liberal and National Party just want to slither into office on a string of fear campaigns because they know that fear is a potent force in politics. 
That is why they use it. 
It also helps mask their real policy agenda because it is not a pretty agenda. 
And what would they have us fear?
- They'd have us fear debt and deficits - though we have less debt by a country mile than any of the major advanced economies.
- They'd have us fear a tax that requires mining companies to pay their fair share - though these companies now enjoy record profitability. 
- They'd have us fear an emissions trading scheme when we all know that a price on carbon is inevitable - necessary for business, necessary for the environment. 
- And they'd have us fear genuine refugees - although this country has for decades taken the same overall number of refugees each year. 
Every time, they tell us, the sky's about to fall in. 
And then the sky doesn't fall in. 
It didn't fall in after native title. It didn't fall in over the abolition of Work Choices. And it's not going to fall in now. 
Each of these claims will be contested by the facts, and each will be found wanting. 
Because the fears they promote are built on sand. 
Our task, as ever, is to recognise the concerns of the Australian community, not to deny them, and instead to put the facts. 
The Liberals and Nationals oppose everything.
They propose nothing. 
Except, of course, fear. 
That's what seems to define Mr Abbott's Liberal and National Party - the most extreme Liberal leader in history. 
Opposition to reform; stagnation against progress; fear against hope.
A party that looks not to the common good, but only what's in it for me. 
Friends, we in the Australian Labor Party can trace our lineage all the way back to the government of Andrew Fisher a century ago.
Indeed, all the way back to the founding of the Labor Party in 1891 on the fields of Barcaldine and the wharves of Balmain. 
And if Andrew Fisher was with us tonight, I believe he'd still feel at home. 
I think he'd be proud of the achievements today of the party he helped to found and lead into office. 
- The Fair Work Act, that reflects the same values that shaped his reforms to the Conciliation and Arbitration Act. 
- Australia's first-ever Paid Parental Leave scheme, shaped by the same values that inspired Australia's first-ever maternity allowance, under Fisher. 
- The expansion of universal superannuation, shaped by the same values that underpinned Fisher's commitment to the age pension.
- The National Broadband Network, shaped by the same nation-building values that inspired the national railway line Fisher built across the Australian continent.
- And when we told him that Australia emerged in better shape than any of the major advanced economies, after the worst global recession since the 1930s, I reckon he'd be proud, and maybe not all that surprised.
Friends, Andrew Fisher was neither a soaring intellect, nor a powerful orator. 
But he had character, determination and the deepest sense of Labor values. 
And Fisher's achievements in office make him soar above contemporaries who enjoyed far greater education, privilege and prowess. 
As we cast our eyes back over the past century, we can see how the election of 1910 pointed with hope to Australia's future. 
The nation where a Scottish miner's son could rise to national leadership is a nation where hope can triumph over fear; a nation that would provide a home for the refugees from war and destruction in Europe a generation later; a nation that would make a home for people from every corner of the world since; a nation that would finally come together to formally recognise its grave mistreatment of Indigenous Australians, and to offer these first Australians a formal apology. 
Friends, Australia in 2010 is very different to what it was in 1910. 
In so many ways, a better nation. 
A land of greater diversity, opportunity and possibility, and a much better nation for the life of Andrew Fisher and the work of successive generations of the Australian Labor Party. 
I'm proud to lead a Government that stands in the great tradition of Andrew Fisher.
I'm proud to lead a reforming Labor Government. 
And I'm proud to lead a nation-building Government grounded in enduring Labor values - of hope triumphing over fear. 
A government with a vision for a stronger, fairer Australia in the 21st century. 
And a government that is getting on with the job of building that future today. 


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
It's good to be back home in Queensland.
It's good to be here at the Queensland Media Club.
And it's good to be given the opportunity to talk both about the nation's future and Queensland's future.
During the past decade, Queensland has been driving Australia's growth - with State final demand growing by an average annual rate of 4.7 per cent, compared to national average GDP growth of 3.0 per cent.
It's therefore a state where governments also have to manage the challenges of growth.
Our purpose as a government is to keep the economy strong and provide a secure future for Australian families.
As a government, we came to office with an ambitious agenda because we believe Australian families deserved better - better economic opportunities, better health and hospitals and better schools.
We've made progress.
We've cut income taxes three years in a row so that someone on $50,000 will now pay 18 per cent less tax than 3 years ago.
We've ended Work Choices so that basic conditions like penalty rates have been restored.
We've increased hospital funding by 50 per cent in just two years.
And much much more.
When we were all threatened by the global financial crisis, as a government we did what we had to do.
We acted decisively to support Australian families.
As the National Accounts showed this week, if we had not taken decisive action, the Australian economy have gone into recession like almost all other advanced economies.
But because we acted together, Australia has come through stronger than almost every other advanced economy.
Together, we've actually created almost 55,000 jobs in the economy here in Queensland, and 225,000 jobs nationally - since the global recession began in 2008, while jobs have been slashed around the world.
Nonetheless, the truth is that many working families and small businesses in Queensland and across the nation are still doing it tough, because the path to economic recovery is uneven.
For the future, we're absolutely determined to continue the job we began for working families.
That starts with maintaining a strong economy.
We're getting the budget back to surplus in three years' time - three years ahead of time - to keep the economy strong.
Our debt levels are low - peaking at less than one-tenth the average of the major advanced economies, and less than half the level projected a year ago.
And through these core financial disciplines, we are keeping spending under control.
But the purpose of keeping the economy strong is to make sure all Queenslanders, and all Australians, are getting a fair go - as well as getting a fair share of our nation's prosperity.
That's why we're implementing the most far-reaching reforms to our health and hospitals system since the introduction of Medicare almost three decades ago.
We're already funding 1,000 new nurse training places every year.
We'll have an additional 1,300 GPs qualified or in training by 2013.
And we're putting the funding of our national health and hospitals network on a sustainable long term footing, where the Australian Government for the first time in history will be the dominant funder of our public hospital system of Australia.
We're building better primary schools for our kids.
We're currently delivering Trades Training Centres for 732 secondary schools and in the next three years, for another 520.
We're delivering our commitment to provide computers for every year 9 to 12 student across the nation - the Deputy Prime Minister delivered the 300,000th computer today in western Sydney.
And despite setbacks, both in Copenhagen and in the Australian Senate, which three times blocked the Government's emissions trading scheme, we will continue to act on climate change, with major investments in renewables like solar power.
We have now passed laws to ensure that by 2020, we'll be generating enough renewable energy to meet the needs of all Australian households.
Australia's working families do deserve better, and we are determined to continue the work that we have begun.
Because much work remains to be done.
Making nation-building investments for our future, to tackle the large infrastructure backlog.
Investing in roads, railways, ports and a high-speed National Broadband Network.
But above all, investing in our people - in their education, 
their health and in the strength of their communities.
So that we can build a stronger Australia.
And build an Australia with a fair go for all - and with a fair share for all.
We have focused a major share of our national investment in Queensland.
Our record of achievement is significant.
Just as our plans for Queensland's future are substantial.
We've been there to support Queensland during the global economic recession.
We supported Queensland's financial institutions during the Global Financial Crisis - guaranteeing bank deposits and wholesale term funding for banks, because we were determined that Queensland financial institutions survived the crisis when many said at the time they would not.
Queensland's economy has been supported by the Government's Nation-Building Economic Stimulus package to the tune of $10.8 billion - through payments to support working families and investment in medium and longer-term infrastructure.
The Government is also making major productivity investments to build a stronger Queensland.
In our first two years in government, we increased our investment in transport infrastructure for Queensland by 125 per cent compared to the last two years of the previous government.
That includes:
- An additional $884 million for the Ipswich Motorway.
- $488 million on the Bruce Highway. 
- $365 million towards development of the Gold Coast Light Rail system, and
- $98 million for 66 rail crossing safety projects and 207 black spot projects.
We have increased our national education investment in Queensland by 138 per cent in our first four years compared to the last four years of the previous government.
This includes:
- $3.1 billion for 5,898 projects at 1725 schools under the school modernisation program;
All these projects have kept builders and tradies in work during a difficult time in the economy - supporting local economies across the state.
The Government is also making major investments in health, housing and pensions so that all Australians get a fair go and have their fair share.
We have increased the investment in Queensland's health and hospitals system by 55 per cent compared to the previous health care agreement.
And building on this, under the recent COAG agreement on health reform, the Australian Government will provide an additional $1.05 billion in health funding for Queensland over the next four years.
By 2013-14, this will be funding an extra 4,400 elective surgery procedures and an additional 162,000 emergency department presentations - as well as new funding for 265 new sub-acute beds, training for doctors and health professionals, and new primary care and aged care services.
We are investing in social housing for Queenslanders families who most need it - with $1.1 billion for the construction of around 4,050 new houses, and more than 23,000 more undergoing repairs and maintenance.
Some 569,000 pensioners and carers in Queensland have received substantial pension increases of up to $100 per fortnight - the single biggest increase in the history of the pension, helping make a big difference for those struggling with cost of living pressures.
The Australian Government has therefore radically increased its investment in Queensland's future.
All this investment in the future strength of our economy and delivering a fair go and a fair share for working families depends on the continuing reform of our economy.
To boost productivity growth.
To create a seamless national economy.
And ensure that Australian companies remain competitive with the rest of the world.
And that includes tax reform.
The Government received the Henry Review at the start of this year.
The economic opportunity we confronted was to convert Australia's strong performance through the global recession into a lasting economic advantage.
By boosting the competiveness of our economy, lifting national savings, and boosting infrastructure investment.
I was under no illusion as to the size of the political challenge we would be taking on in this reform.
I knew that those affected by the tax would fight and fight hard.
And so they have.
But so will we.
We decided to take on this challenge which should have been taken on a decade ago as commodity prices began their record surge.
We are determined to prosecute our case that mining companies should pay a fairer share for the resources that the Australian people own.
And in doing so, we will not be intimidated by the statements or actions of any large mining company - foreign or domestic - and that includes Xstrata.
The Government believes in the importance of tax reform:
- To boost Australia's global competitiveness, by cutting the tax rate for corporate and small businesses.
- To boost Australia's saving, by lifting Australia's pool of superannuation savings by $85 billion over 10 years 
- To boost retirement incomes - that is, better super for working families, adding an extra $108,000 to the retirement super of an average worker aged 30 now.
- And to boost investment in infrastructure, funding the rail, roads and ports our resources sector needs
To fund these important reforms, the Government announced plans for a Resources Super Profits Tax.
The Government took on the challenge to reform Australia's system of resource taxation with our eyes wide open as to the complexity and scale of the task.
We saw the same scare campaign the last time a 40 percent profits-based tax was introduced for offshore mining in the 1980s - although that industry went on to flourish.
The mining industry said the industry would collapse after the introduction of native title.
They were wrong.
The mining industry said the industry would go backwards if we abolished Work Choices and AWAs.
They were wrong.
The fears campaigns have been many.
But we have chosen to take on this battle for reform.
I believe the Government will prevail in the resource super profits tax debate - because it comes down to two simple arguments:
First, we should be taxing the profits not the production of our resources.
Even the mining companies accept that profits taxes are better than the current state production taxes.
Second, the mining companies can and should pay a fairer share now that they are earning huge boom-time profits from minerals - minerals owned by the Australian people.
All we are asking is for the profitable mining companies to pay a share of tax similar to the share they paid in the past.
On the first point, I believe we have got the fundamental principles of resource tax reform right.
It is right that we move towards a system of resource taxation which taxes profits not production.
The existing system of state royalties is inefficient.
Royalties tax production - unfairly disadvantaging mines with higher investment requirements and higher extraction costs.
The current system of royalties means that companies are paying tax on every tonne of ore they extract - even before they have made a profit.
The super profits tax will remove royalties - meaning that mining companies won't pay tax until they are profitable - indeed until they have earned a return on their investment.
The RSPT in fact shares risk between companies and the Government.
The Government contributes 40 per cent of the cost of the investment through tax credits.
The Government later takes 40 per cent of the supernormal profits of companies if and when they became profitable.
And critically - the Government fully refunds to companies the existing state production-based royalties.
What will this system deliver?
First, it means that less profitable mining companies will actually pay less tax - Treasury modelling indicates that for a typical project - a company earning less than 10 per cent returns will pay less tax.
Second, this system will introduce minimal distortions to the production and investment decisions of the companies developing the resource.
Third, this system will promote the development of Australian resources.
Modelling by Econtech suggests that under an RSPT scheme, mining investment will rise by 4.5 per cent, mining production by 5.5 per cent in the long run and jobs by 7 per cent.
Even the Minerals Council CEO Mitch Hooke has confirmed that they prefer a profits-based system:
"We agree with the concept .... We, in fact, put it on the table through the course of the Henry review and that was let's move from the inefficient and complex set of royalties that exist across the states .... to a profits-based system where the risk and reward is shared between the state, who owns the minerals, and the companies that develop them."
The second principle of our tax reform is that mining companies should pay a fair share for the resources they rent from the Australian people.
This means that we need a tax that is flexible enough to adapt to changing global commodity prices.
Royalties are based on volumes not profits - and they have not kept pace with the mining boom.
By taxing Super Profits, the RPST will adapt to changing commodity prices.
The tax take will rise through commodity booms; and fall as prices moderate.
By contrast, the Leader of the Opposition has said that mining companies are paying too much tax.
Others disagree - including, by the way, the Premier of Western Australia who wants to raise the royalty rate and indicated earlier this year that mining companies were getting away with murder. 
I believe many Queenslanders and many Australians feel the same way.
And I believe they are right.
These are the two core principles of resources tax reform:
First, moving to a system based on profits rather than 
production.
Second, ensuring that Australians get a fair share.
I also want to deal with a number of myths that have been given circulation in recent weeks in a debate characterised by a lot of heat and considerably less light.
Myth number one:
Andrew Forrest said on Wednesday that the Government was:
"trading the sovereign status of the country for a chance at improving an election process or plugging a hole in the budget".
With the greatest of respect to Mr Forrest, this claim is without foundation and he knows it.
Contrary to this myth, the Government's tax package has nothing to do with returning the budget to surplus, as any examination of the budget papers would reveal.
The revenues it raises will fund cuts to the company tax rate, tax breaks and tax simplification for small business, better super for working families, and a national infrastructure fund.
The Government is forecasting the Budget to go back to surplus in 2012-13.
In that year and every year preceding it, the Government's tax reform package in fact has a negative net impact on the budget bottom line.
So this claim by Mr Forrest is simply untrue and if he consulted the Budget papers, he would know that to be the case.
The second myth emerges from claims that the stock market is falling due to the RSPT.
Mr Abbott said recently:
"our share market is under pressure, at least in part, because the government has totally mismanaged its proposal for a great big new tax on mining". (25 May 2010)
The facts prove otherwise.
Australian shares have fallen by less than in other countries.
In the month after the mining tax was announced, Australian shares fell by less than in other countries.
- The Australian stock market fell by 7.4 per cent
- The London market fell by even more: 7.7 per cent. 
- The US Dow Jones index fell by even more, 9.2 per cent, having recorded its worst May performance in 70 years (1940).
- The Japanese stock market fell by 10.6 per cent.
Further, Australian mining shares have fallen by less than the average of all shares.
In the month of May, Australian mining shares fell by less than the average of all shares: 
- Australian mining shares fell by 6 per cent. 
- But all Australian shares fell by more than that - 7.8 per cent 
- The banks and financials fell by 10.4 per cent. 
- In May, Australian mining shares have outperformed the market by almost 2 per cent.
Again, however, we must be mindful of misinformation in the market-place and hence the need to put the facts before the Australian people.
A third myth in the current debate is that the RSPT will increase the cost of living.
When asked about their position on the mining tax, Mr Abbott said: "it could involve very real costs for consumers.....it's a tax on consumers" (25 May 2010)
The truth is the vast majority of the minerals subject to this tax - like iron ore in the Pilbara - are shipped overseas at prices set on world markets.
Econtech modelling shows that the Government's tax reform package - including the RSPT and our cuts to company tax - will actually reduce the price of food and housing over time by making our economy more competitive.
The independent Econtech report says: "Tax reform means that the cost of living .... is lower than would otherwise be the case." (Page 27)
But I will tell you what does affect consumer prices - and that is a tax on all business with more than a $5 million turnover that Mr Abbott says he will introduce to fund $75,000 a year paid maternity leave for millionaires.
That tax on companies like Coles and Woolies will flow straight through to consumers with higher prices for bread, milk and eggs.
So much for the myth on the cost of living. 
The fourth myth is the regular claim from mining companies that this tax will reduce investment.
The simple truth of the RSPT is that very profitable projects will pay more tax.
And less profitable or marginal projects will pay less tax.
So projects that would have gone ahead anyway will pay more; and projects that were in the balance will pay less tax.
Some of the numbers and claims being bandied about by some mining bosses like Clive Palmer are so ridiculous they do not bear scrutiny.
Mr Palmer claimed to be shutting down a project in South Australia.
We're still trying to locate that project.
But Mr Palmer is not alone.
On the 4th May (two days after the tax was announced) West Australian iron ore explorer Cape Lambert Resources announced it would halt its search for minerals in Australia due to the new Government super tax.
On that day, Tony Sage, who is the Executive Chairman of Cape Lambert said he would now shift the company's exploration activities to its projects outside of Australia.
On the 6th May, Mr Sage notified the ASX that he would acquire a further 1 million shares in Cape Lambert.
Facts can be troublesome things in a debate such as this.
That brings me to the current case of Xstrata.
In the last few days Xstrata has announced the suspension of two projects.
Xstrata claimed that the suspensions were directly related to the Resources Super Profits Tax.
First, I find it perplexing that any company is making a decision about the future of major projects at this point:
The new proposed system was announced just 1 month ago.
We are 12 months away from the draft legislation.
We are 24 months away from the start of the new system.
The second point to make about the suspended projects is that they were always challenging for Xstrata.
It is instructive to reflect on what analysts have said about the Ernst Henry mine's future in recent years.
Here is what RBC Capital said about the Ernest Henry mine back in 2007:
"we believe that production at the Ernest Henry mine will reduce significantly from 2011 onwards as the operation switches from an open pit to underground operation."
Let me also quote from ABARE's publication "Australian Commodities", Volume 14, March 2007:
"Xstrata's Ernest Henry mine is scheduled to cease mining in January 2010, but stockpiled ore will continue to be processed, which will enable the production of copper concentrates (at a lower rate) until 2012."
Various industry analysts have expressed the view that the Ernest Henry copper mine is a mature mine with rising costs and declining ore quality.
The third point to note in relation to yesterday's announcement is that Xstrata's tactics are not new.
Xstrata was one of a number of companies that directly lobbied the government and ran a well coordinated media campaign claiming that getting rid of Work Choices and Work Choices style AWA's would destroy their business.
The fourth point to make about the Xstrata announcement is that commentators today are questioning the accuracy of Xstrata's claims on employment.
Elizabeth Knight wrote in the Sydney Morning Herald today wrote on the employment impact claims of the company:
"It was a stupid idea by Xstrata to exaggerate and gloss over the detail in order to push its point. It detracts from the merits of its debate."
I should note that Elizabeth Knight is an opponent of the RSPT.
Fifth, the fact is that the RSPT scheme will reduce the tax burden on marginal mines.
David Buckingham - ex CEO of the Minerals Council has said:
"...what that's going to do is lighten the tax burden on the less profitable projects. It will actually spread the base around which effective investment can take place. This is actually an incentive to the sector, not a detriment.
The final point to make is that while Xstrata has made some interesting points very recently about the possible impact of the RSPT.
On May 26, the Queensland Coal Industry Rail Group (which comprises 13 companies including Xstrata) bid $4.85 billion to buy the QR Central Queensland coal track network.
The media statement from the consortium said: "QCIRG assumes that the proposed tax, if implemented, would not apply to infrastructure or the operations of QCIRG and that a sensible outcome can be achieved with the Commonwealth Government on any tax on resources such that the industry's growth ambitions can still be realised." (QCIRG - Media Statement - 26 May 2010).
A year is a long time in politics.
It seems to be an eternity when it comes to commerce.
Last week - confident that in fact a sensible landing point could be achieved in relation to the RSPT.
One week later - not the case at all.
But we know that Xstrata doesn't want an RSPT that would mean they pay more tax on their most profitable operations.
Indeed Xstrata says it should pay less tax.
I would simply say this to Xstrata:
Many companies are negotiating with the Government in good faith.
They are engaged with the Treasury Panel and I thank them for their constructive cooperation.
Other mining companies are less constructive.
And I would repeat what I said yesterday in Parliament:
This Government will not be intimidated by the statements or actions of any mining company - foreign or domestic.
This Government will not be stood over by any mining company - foreign or domestic.
This Government will stand up for the national interest - and that means getting a fairer share for the resource that is owned by all Australians.
For better super for all Australians.
For tax cuts for all Australian small businesses.
For tax cuts for all Australian big businesses.
For better infrastructure for Australia's regions and the resource states that support them.
The Government has delivered strong and responsible economic management through the Global Recession. 
And we will continue to deliver strong and responsible economic management into the future. 
Tax reform is a challenge this government took on because we believe it is critical for Australia's future prosperity - not because it would be popular, and not because it would fill a hole in the budget.
We took on the challenge because we believe it is essential to strong economic management. 
Responsible economic management is not an abstract concept. 
It is the vehicle through which the Government can deliver on the aspirations of the Australian people. 
It is because of our economic strength through the global recession that:
- We have been able to deliver historic reforms to our health and hospital system.
- We have been able to deliver three consecutive tax cuts for working Australians.
- We were able to deliver on pension reform.
- We have been able to significantly boost investment in infrastructure.
- We have been able to invest in skills. 
These are the dividends of strong economic management. 
I am determined to get on with delivering for Australian families. 
Delivering tax reform that gives all Queenslanders, and all Australians, their fair share.
Delivering better schools, better health and better hospitals. 
Delivering a strong economy, with a secure future for Australian families.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
Women and men of the Health Services Union Australia, it's great to join you this morning, because you are the backbone of our hospitals, our aged care and our health services. You know how important your work is and how much the health system depends on you.
I've got a bit of insight into your work as well, both from working as a wardsman at Canterbury Hospital in my late teens, when I learnt that job is much, much more than just pushing a trolley around a ward, and from visiting dozens of hospitals all across the country during the past 12 months as the Government has embarked on the work of national health reform.
One thing I've heard loud and clear as the Health Minister Nicola Roxon and I have talked to patients, to health experts, to staff, and to health unions is this: there's a lot we can do to deliver better health and better hospitals, and it doesn't matter who talks to me - nurses, surgeons, orderlies, ambos, clerical staff, or the people behind the counter in the café - everyone knows we need change. And everyone knows we want change, and that's what we are delivering - The most fundamental change in Australia's health system since the introduction of Medicare, a National Health and Hospitals Network that is nationally funded and locally run.
This morning I want to talk to you about how our plan will deliver better healthcare for all Australians, but first I will discuss how healthcare fits into the Government's larger vision for Australia's future.
Two and a half years ago, the Government that I lead was sworn into office. Since our first day in office, our purpose has been to build a stronger economy that delivers a fairer share for working families.
We came to office with an ambitious agenda because we believe Australian families deserved better: better economic opportunities, better health and hospitals and better schools.
We've made progress.
We've cut income taxes three years in a row so that someone on $50,000 will now pay $1,750 less in income tax. That means almost one in every five dollars they were paying in tax three years ago, is now back in their own pockets, helping them pay for the weekly groceries, get on top of the pile of unpaid bills sitting on the kitchen counter, or put a few dollars aside each week for the kids' Christmas presents.
We've also delivered an education tax refund to help get the kids through school, paying for things like textbooks, a laptop, a printer, broadband at home and trade tools for kids in school trade courses. This year, that refund will put up to $779 back in your pocket for each child in secondary school, and $390 for each child in primary school.
We've ended Work Choices. That means Australians can no longer be forced onto AWA individual contracts that cut their pay and conditions. We've built a modern safety net of decent pay and conditions. Employers can't rip away penalty rates, overtime and leave loading with no compensation, as happened with WorkChoices, and for the first time, employees have the right to come together and bargain with their employer for a better deal.
We're investing in nation-building for Australia's future after years of governments failing to invest enough to keep our roads, railways, ports and broadband up to world class standards and much, much more.
When we were all threatened by the global financial crisis, as a government we did what we had to do. We acted decisively to support Australian families.
Almost every other advanced economy went into recession. Australia didn't, and the reason we didn't was because as a nation, we all came together, governments, business, unions and local communities.
The Government took decisive action. As a result, Australia has come through stronger than almost every other advanced economy.
In the rest of the world, millions of jobs have been lost - as much as 16 million in advanced economies, but in Australia, since the global recession began in 2008 we've been creating jobs. There's almost 225,000 more jobs today than there were then. All of us should be proud of that, because every one of those jobs matters.
Even so, the last couple of years have still been tough for many families, because the path to economic recovery is uneven.
We've got much, much more to do to keep the economy strong and deliver a fairer share for Australian families. It all starts with maintaining a strong economy.
We're getting the budget back to surplus in three years' time, three years ahead of time, to keep the economy strong. Our debt levels are low, peaking at less than one-tenth the average of the major advanced economies, and less than half the level projected a year ago.
We're undertaking the big challenge of tax reform, so that we can boost superannuation for all Australians, and cut taxes to make Australian companies and small businesses more competitive, and we're investing in the things that will make our economy stronger and more productive in the future.
We're investing in an education revolution, building better primary schools for our kids. We're currently delivering Trades Training Centres for 732 secondary schools and in the next three years, for another 520. We're delivering our commitment to provide computers for every year 9 to 12 student across the nation. Last Friday the Deputy Prime Minister delivered the 300,000th computer to a school in Cranebrook in Sydney's west.
And despite setbacks, we will continue to act on climate change, with major investments in renewables like solar power. We have now passed laws to ensure that by 2020, we'll be generating enough renewable energy to meet the needs of all Australian households.
And most importantly, I want to discuss today how we're tackling health reform.
Fixing our hospitals and healthcare is important for everyone in this room because it matters to you every day you turn up at work, but it's also important to you and to all Australians because all of us depend on our healthcare system, whether it's for an ageing mum or dad, our young kids, a sudden emergency or managing an ongoing condition.
Better hospitals and better healthcare matter for all Australians. That's why the Government has taken on this challenge, because we know from the major review of the health system that we commissioned when we came to office that our health system is at a tipping point. It's under enormous pressures, and those pressures are going to keep on growing.
We can't just sit idly by and do nothing, and we certainly can't afford a government that rips billions out of our public hospitals as Tony Abbott did as Health Minister, and as he'd do again if he becomes Prime Minister.
Our hospitals and healthcare system needs reform. That's why we're implementing the most far-reaching reforms to our health and hospitals system since the introduction of Medicare almost three decades ago.
We will make the Australian Government the dominant funder of our public hospital system for the first time in history. That's important, because in the long run the States simply can't afford to meet the growing cost of healthcare. It will literally send them broke. By stepping up to the plate, the Australian Government will ensure that our hospitals and healthcare system have the funding they need for the future.
On top of this, we are delivering more resources right now. We are investing in 1,300 new beds for our hospitals, expanding capacity in emergency departments and elective surgery, and supporting 2,500 new aged care places.
We're making major new investments in primary health care with GP Super Clinics that can provide care when you need it after hours, and that can help avoid the run-around between GPs, specialists, pathology and other health services.
We're already funding 1,000 new nurse training places a year. We are raising the number of GPs being trained to 1,200 a year - more than double the cap imposed by Mr Abbott. We are doubling the number of scholarships and locum places for our allied health professionals every year.
Each of these investments will help improve the health services in which you work, but let's be specific about what a National Health and Hospitals Network means for Australian families.
Consider how much healthcare has changed from our parent's generation, the days when visiting your GP meant visiting an office with one doctor and a pile of cardboard records; when a cancer diagnosis was less likely to provide hope of survival; and when chronic diseases like heart disease and diabetes were more likely to be treated in hospital, often when they had severe and fatal effects.
Now consider our vision for better hospitals and better health care through the Government's plan for the National Health and Hospitals Network.
Imagine a family with young kids. It's Saturday morning, and their seven year old daughter, Emily, has suddenly come up with a severe skin reaction. Her mum, Anthea, doesn't know what it is or how she should treat it. She picks up the phone to the family's local medical practice, to find that it is closed, but her call is automatically put through to the National After Hours GP and primary care service, in which the Government is investing $126 million over four years.
Anthea is able to get immediate advice from a registered nurse who can ask the right questions and make an initial assessment of whether she needs to get immediate assistance. If required, she will be put through to a GP, who can tell her whether she needs to call an ambulance, go to a hospital, or arrange for Emily to be seen by a GP in their community.
That advice line is an important first step because it gives Anthea the opportunity to speak directly to a qualified professional for advice.
Let's imagine the advice is to go to the GP. The National After Hours service helps arrange for Emily to be seen at a clinic that is only 15 minutes away. Emily is taken straight to this clinic to see a GP, and her mum is spared precious time ringing through a pile of numbers in the Yellow Pages.
It might also mean that Anthea and Emily avoid a long wait in a hospital emergency department when she could have been helped by a local health service, something that happens to 2 million Australians every year, because of the introduction of personally-controlled electronic health records, with Anthea's permission, the GP is immediately able to see Emily's medical history: her history, for example, of asthma; her previous allergies; and the current medication that she is receiving. This helps to quickly identify possible causes of a skin reaction and helps avoid prescribing medicine that might have an adverse effect.
Let's imagine that the doctor advises a further consultation with a specialist dermatologist. Because of the Government's $355 million investment, the clinic that Emily has visited is one of 425 across the country that has been upgraded so that it can deliver more services in a single location. This means that more specialist doctors will be co-located and this will be made possible because the Australian Government is investing $144 million over four years to train more specialist doctors - 680 more over the next decade. In fact, a dermatologist might be on duty that morning, enabling the GP to walk Emily across directly and perhaps have a direction conversation about Emily's skin reaction.
This kind of interaction has been rare in the past. As many of us have experienced first-hand as parents, carers or friends, or for our own healthcare, getting to see a specialist often involves long waiting lists, battling through traffic jams and juggling time off work.
Now let's imagine that the patient is not the daughter, but the mum. Anthea has a history of diabetes in her family, and she has recently been diagnosed with diabetes herself. Her doctor is participating in the Government's $449 million plan to provide more coordinated care for diabetes sufferers. That means she can benefit from a major innovation in primary health care.
She can be confident that instead of having to initiate regular doctor appointments and feel responsible for organising every aspect of her care, she is now going to benefit from ongoing care supported by single general practice where she is enrolled.
Anthea's GP will prepare a care plan which identifies the services she will need over the next 12 months. That includes regular visits to a dietitian who is co-located with the local Clinic. It also includes visits to an endocrinologist who will help to identify any emerging health problems associated with the diabetes and develop preventative strategies to avoid a deterioration. She'll see a podiatrist, and a diabetes educator.
This contrasts to the experience of healthcare that many diabetes patients have right now, which often involves them having to navigate their way around the health system alone and without any guidance. In fact, all too often Australians living with diabetes end up in hospital. Indeed, one out of every three avoidable hospital admissions is related to diabetes.
That's why the Government is acting to provide better health care for the estimated 2.2 million Australians with diabetes over the next decade. This is not just in the best interest of Australians, but for the first time it is in the financial interests of the Australian Government. There will no longer be an incentive to shunt patients from Commonwealth-funded GP and primary care services into the state funded hospital system.
As the dominant funder of public hospitals, the Australian Government will ensure that patients have access to high quality health care closer to home, because we will otherwise foot the bill for more expensive hospital care.
Now let's turn to Anthea's elderly father, Angelo. Angelo has been experiencing chronic hip pain. His specialist doctor has put him on the waiting list for a hip replacement, but there's a high demand in his area because of the older age profile of the population.
We know people are waiting too long for elective surgery and our reforms will change that. The Government's $800 million investment will ensure 95 per cent of all patients waiting for surgery will be treated within clinically recommended times, and from July 2012, anyone who has been on the waiting list for longer than clinically recommended will have their surgery fast-tracked. That means that Angelo may have his hip replacement operation in a hospital in another area, or in a private hospital.
Now let's imagine one other person: Walter, a 53-year-old farmer in northern New South Wales.
A regular checkup with his GP has discovered a suspect mole on his back. The mole turns out to be cancer, and a nasty one. It's a diagnosis which turns his life upside down, but instead of having to go to Brisbane or Sydney for treatment, he is referred to Lismore - to the North Coast Cancer Institute Regional Cancer Centre at Lismore Base Hospital.
He'll be able to stay at Our House, the new 20-unit cancer patient and carer accommodation facility. Because the diagnosis has been made early, and he hasn't had to wait months before he can arrange getting to a major city, he now has a better chance of beating cancer, because one of the awful things about cancer - an awful disease - is that Australians living in rural and regional areas are three times more likely to die from some cancers than their counterparts in major cities. That's why we are investing in 20 regional cancer care projects around the country.
If complexities emerge, Walter is able to access a world class cancer institute in Sydney, the Chris O'Brien Cancer Centre, where treatment and research come together under the same roof. It is part of our National Plan for Better Cancer Care, backed by more than $2.3 billion in funding since the Labor Government came to office in 2007.
It's at all these times - when your child has a serious rash, when you are battling with a long-term illness, when you need surgery to restore your mobility and when you suspect you might have a very serious disease - that Australians turn to their health and hospitals system. That's when better hospitals and better healthcare really make a difference and that's when the Government's health reforms will really make a difference in the lives of Australian families and these changes will support the critical role of the health workforce in our health and hospitals system.
While the Local Hospital Networks will assume responsibility for the day to day operations of their services, it is not the Government's intention to change existing employment arrangements, including the Crown employment arrangement in NSW. States will continue to have responsibility for overall industrial relations policy, including the conduct of enterprise bargaining and the setting of broad IR policies such as union consultation. It is the Government's clear intention that existing wages and conditions will be maintained in the introduction of Local Hospital Networks and any future changes would only occur through the usual negotiating processes applying in each state.
Friends, I said earlier today that the Australian Government came to office with an ambitious agenda. We came to office with an ambitious agenda, because we're ambitious for Australian families and Australia's future.
Government is hard work, and we're involved in some very important national debates right now - on health reform, on tax reform, on industrial relations and on economic responsibility and how we ensure Australian families have their fair share of our nation's prosperity.
Within the next six months there will be an election. Australians will have the choice between a reforming Government that is building a stronger economy with a fair share for working families - and the risk of Tony Abbott as Prime Minister.
Mr Abbott is a risk to Australian families. His record of pushing extreme policies like WorkChoices, ripping a billion dollars out of our public hospitals, and his erratic decision making speaks for itself.
I don't believe Australian families are prepared to risk their future with Tony Abbott. I believe they want a government that is committed to delivering better opportunities, better schools, and better health and hospitals. That's what the Government is delivering.
Australian families deserve better, and we are determined to continue that work. 


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
It's great to be back in Western Australia for this, my 16th visit as Prime Minister.
On average, I've been in the West every two months since the last election.
And the reason is simple - WA is a driving force of the Australian economy for the 21st century.
WA is a major Australian gateway to the world.
This great international city of Perth.
Its great public universities.
Great centres of innovation.
Outstanding tourist areas like the Margaret River, which now rivals the vineyards of France.
WA's mighty mineral and energy fields which make such an important contribution to our nation's exports and our national economy.
Western Australia has always been characterised by the spirit of enterprise.
Always by a willingness to have a go.
And all Australians share a sense of pride in this State's nation-building achievements.
WA has had to overcome the tyranny of distance from the major population centres of the East.
And it has done so in spades.
WA has become Australia's gateway to India.
To China.
To Indonesia, and the rest of South East Asia.
This is a State with unlimited potential.
Today, I want to talk to you in a very concrete way about what we have done together so far.
And what we can do together for the future.
Always, my overriding goal is to build a stronger economy that delivers a fairer share for working families.
We came to office with an ambitious agenda because we believe Australian families deserved better: better economic opportunities, better health and hospitals and better schools.
And the Government has made progress.
We've ended Work Choices.
And that means a fairer share for West Australian workers.
Let me give you as an example what that has meant locally.
More than a thousand employees work with the Activ Foundation in over one hundred facilities across Perth and regional towns like Albany, Busselton, Kalgoorlie and Manjimup.
These workers have challenging jobs providing respite care, home care and full accommodation services for people living with disabilities.
WorkChoices delivered them individual contract AWAs that gave them little or no access to penalty rates, permanency or personal leave.
Home care assistants were on as little at $15.53 per hour.
But now, under the Fair Work Act, the union and their employer have negotiated an enterprise agreement delivering them better pay, penalty rates, long service leave and access to permanency.
And relations between management and staff have improved.
The Government has also cut income taxes three years in a row.
Again, that has made a difference for around one million West Australian taxpayers who are battling cost of living pressures.
That means someone on $50,000 will now pay $1,750 less in income tax.
In other words, an 18 per cent tax cut - or almost one in every five dollars being paid in tax three years ago, is now back in their own pockets.
Nationally, we've boosted our investment in the health and hospitals system by 50 per cent compared with the previous government.
Here in the West, we've increased hospital funding for Western Australia by 55 per cent.
We're funding an additional 1,000 new nurse training places every year nationally.
We are raising the number of GPs being trained to 1,200 a year - more than double the cap imposed by Mr Abbott as Health Minister.
And we've investing to help the WA Government build new hospitals and health facilities, including:
- the new rehabilitation unit at Fiona Stanley Hospital; and
- a new general hospital to replace the existing Swan Districts Hospital.
- new GP Super Clinics in Cockburn, Midland and Wanneroo.
And we are improving the access and support for cancer patients in rural and remote parts of the state with two Regional Cancer Centre projects at Bunbury and outside the South-West, with a multi-site network of rural cancer centres to improve services in Albany, Northam, Narrogin, Geraldton and Kalgoorlie.
As a government, we're also delivering for West Australian families.
When we were all threatened by the global financial crisis, the Government did what we had to do to support jobs and keep our economy strong.
We acted decisively to support families here in Western Australia and across the nation - with an economic stimulus that injected $5.3 billion into the West Australian economy.
Almost every other advanced economy went into recession.
Australia didn't, and the reason we didn't was because as a 
nation, we all came together, governments, business, unions and local communities.
The Government took decisive action.
As a result, Australia has come through stronger than almost every other advanced economy in the world.
Although let's be clear - many families and small businesses are still doing it tough because recovery has been so uneven.
In the rest of the world, millions of jobs have been lost - as much as 16 million in the OECD.
But in Australia, since the global recession began in 2008 we've been creating jobs.
There's almost 225,000 more jobs today than there were then.
West Australian families were hit hard by the global recession - with the unemployment rate almost doubling in the 12 months after September 2008.
But since then, 25,000 West Australians are back in jobs and unemployment is now below the nation's average, at 4.7 per cent.
As a government, we know we haven't been able to do everything that we planned - and some things didn't go according to plan.
But we are determined to get on with the job.
We've got much, much more to do to keep the economy strong and deliver a fairer share for Australian families.
It all starts with maintaining a strong economy.
This is critical given the storm clouds gathering over Europe and the uncertainties of global financial markets arising from concerns over some European sovereign debt and public discussions of the risks of default.
Here in Australia, we're getting the budget back to surplus in three years' time, three years ahead of time - to keep the economy strong.
Australia already has the lowest debt and the lowest deficit of all the Major Advanced Economies.
Australia's budget will return to surplus ahead of all the major advanced economies.
Australia's debt levels are lower when compared with the debt levels of all the major advance economies - peaking at less than one-tenth the average of the major advanced economies.
In fact, because our economy didn't go into recession, our net debt will peak at less than half of what was projected 12 months ago.
By keeping the economy strong, tax revenues have held up better.
By keeping people in jobs, we've spent less on unemployment benefits.
That's all helped bring the budget back to black in three years - three years ahead of time.
We're also investing in schools, in training, and in universities, so our kids have the skills they need for the jobs of the future.
We're currently delivering Trades Training Centres for 102 West Australian secondary schools.
We're building better primary schools for our kids - with 2,985 projects across 1,067 West Australian schools.
New libraries, new science centres, new language centres.
We are investing in major building and infrastructure works at West Australian universities, including an Engineering Pavilion at Curtin University of Technology.
We're also investing in nation-building infrastructure for Australia's future after years of governments failing to invest enough in our roads, railways and ports.
The Nation Building Program has increased the national investment in West Australian roads and railways by more than two thirds.
This investment includes projects like the Great Eastern Highway upgrade.
We have committed to new Australian Rail Track Corporation infrastructure in the goldfields region.
We've committed to the development of Oakajee Port, to service mines in the Mid West.
Another example is the Fitzgerald River National Park project.
In early 2009, Premier Barnett came to me and expressed his concern about BHP Billiton's decision to close the Ravensthorpe nickel mine during the worst phase of the global financial crisis.
We resolved to work together to upgrade the roads and facilities within the Park - and support the local community.
The Australian and WA Governments are working together to rebuild and seal 80 kilometres of road, and develop a coastal walking trail from Bremer Bay to Hopetoun.
The project will support more than 80 local jobs.
And it means this outstanding natural asset will become an even more attractive destination for both domestic and international tourists.
And we are committed to making housing more affordable.
We have introduced the Housing Affordability Fund (HAF), to lower the cost of building new homes.
So far, the Government has funded 59 projects across Australia.
A quarter of these - 15 projects- are in Western Australia.
Last month, I visited the Newhaven Development at Armadale, where we are enabling the City of Armadale Council to relocate powerlines, build roads and drains, and install water, power, sewer and gas services.
In this one location, this will allow 59 home buyers on low and moderate incomes to buy homes for under $300,000, with a saving of almost $30,000 per home.
And as I said, this is one of fifteen housing affordability projects we are rolling out across WA.
We are also building around 2,000 social houses in WA, and carrying out repairs and maintenance on around 10,000 existing homes.
This is critical to tackling the shortage of public housing in this state.
And despite setbacks, we will continue to act on climate change.
We are expanding renewable energy so that by 2020, renewables will generate enough power to meet the electricity needs of all Australian households.
And with major investments in renewables like solar energy - building one of the world's largest solar power plants here in Australia.
This morning, I announced a significant investment here in Perth to support the renewable energy component of Australia's bid for the $2.5 billion Square Kilometre Array radio telescope.
As you know, this is a global, competitive project and we're up against South Africa.
Part of the bid criteria is to require the use of sustainable energy in the project.
So the Australian Government's $47.3 million investment announcement today is to build the nation's single largest geo-thermal facility to power the Pawsey High Performance Computing Centre in Kensington - as well as a full scale solar/storage/diesel energy generations system at the Murchison Radio-astronomy Observatory.
This is one of dozens of renewable energy projects the Government is supporting across the nation - all part of the Government's continued response to climate change.
Each one of these investments matters because each plays a part in building a stronger economy that delivers a fairer share to working families.
I know that families in this State face cost of living pressures and there are times they are anxious about the future.
Today, I want to talk to you about that future and about the Government's proposal for a Resources Super Profit Tax.
But before I do, let's learn a lesson from history.
The first Premier of Western Australia, the great explorer and geographer Sir John Forrest, was determined to ensure that the great mining boom of the 1890s built enduring foundations for Western Australia's future.
That boom almost quadrupled the West Australian population in the decade from 1894.
Forrest supported mining but was often opposed by goldminers for his commitment to using the proceeds of the gold rush to leave a lasting endowment for the whole of Western Australia.
Forrest was determined to make lasting investments in 
public works such as railways, bridges, jetties, telegraph lines, pipelines, hospitals and lighthouses.
As his biographer Frank Crowley notes:
"Forrest wanted to make the prosperity of the present pay for the hoped-for success of the future... This did not endear him to goldminers."
But in the long run, those investments helped build this great State.
These are things to learn from the debate of a hundred years ago.
I understand that in this State there is community concern about the Resources Super Profits Tax proposal.
And I also understand that in certain quarters there is outright opposition to it.
And I am here today to listen to those concerns, and to respond to them.
This great State, this great nation has been big enough to work our way through these big debates before.
And I believe we will do so again.
Stripped of all the harsh words and loud noise this debate couldn't be simpler.
The fact is we have now entered a second phase of the mining boom that began nearly a decade ago.
The last mining boom delivered very large profits both in Queensland and in Western Australia.
But not all the working families of Queensland and Western Australia benefited from the boom.
People like Richard Dow, a 57 year old employee of the Activ Foundation - helping people with disabilities in a group home in High Wycombe in Perth, and getting by on an income of just $35,000 per year.
For hundreds of thousands of West Australians like him, the mining boom meant higher rents, bigger mortgage debts, and increased costs of living.
So it's important as a nation that in this boom we do better than in the last boom.
And particularly, we do better in making sure all West Australians get a fair share.
There's a core principle here - the people of Western Australia actually own these resources.
Furthermore, they are finite resources - you can only take them out and ship them off once.
That means acting now to get a fair share of the proceeds for Australian families.
It means acting now to get a fair share for Australian businesses so they can employ more workers.
And it means acting now to see truly first class infrastructure in the resource states.
There is a lot of sound but often not a lot of light in the public debate so far.
I believe that responsible sections of the resources sector now accept that the sector can pay more tax than at present.
I believe that there is also acceptance that a tax based on profit rather than a tax based on volume of ore extracted is a more efficient tax.
These are important foundations stones on which to build.
And in building on this foundation, the Government is determined to implement tax reform which is designed to build a stronger and more enduring foundation for long term economic growth.
The Government's vision for tax reform is to deliver tax benefits right across the WA economy.
Tax reform that will mean we can cut taxes to make Australian companies and small businesses more competitive - to help with their bottom line.
We will cut the company tax rate from 30 to 28 per cent.
Here in the West, at least 50,000 companies stand to benefit from such a tax cut.
Furthermore, we are cutting taxes for small business - all 2.4 million Australia-wide and more than 160,000 here in WA.
For those 160,000 small businesses and tradies here in WA, that means increasing their ability to instantly write-off the purchase of business assets from $1000 to $5000. This really helps, straightaway, with the bottom line for a small restaurateur buying an oven, fridge or a new computer.
These small businesses are an important driver of the Australian economy.
And cutting taxes for small businesses will increase their profits and give them more resources to invest in growth.
Reducing the company tax rate will make Australian businesses more competitive with others they compete with around the world.
The second key element of our reform package is to lift the Superannuation Guarantee for all Australian workers, from 9 per cent to 12 per cent over the next decade.
That means better super for 700,000 WA workers - a better and more secure retirement. 
This will boost our national superannuation savings pool by $85 billion over 10 years.
For a 30 year old on a wage of $50,000 today, that will mean an extra $108,000 in their super nest egg for retirement.
Good for the economy.
Good for working families.
Third, because of tax reform, we will fund investment in essential infrastructure that will help build a stronger and more productive economy.
These are the three key endowments that will come from the Resources Super Profits Tax.
They are benefits that will reach every Australian home and every Australian business.
And - more importantly - they will reach into the future, conferring advantage upon our nation through this generation and beyond.
Including here in Western Australia.
My vision for tax reform includes building a fund to invest in new infrastructure that is essential for West Australian families, WA communities and for this State's future.
To use some of the proceeds from the mining boom to build the road, rail, ports, and the infrastructure for the workforce that supports the mining industry, and which supports WA's future growth.
The Australian Government is determined to ensure that mining communities benefit from the resources boom.
It is not right that the regions and towns producing so much of Australia's wealth, should suffer from a poverty of investment.
I believe it is time to put something back into the mining communities, and those communities which support them, that give so much to Australia and make our national economy strong.
It is my intention that the lion share of the infrastructure fund generated by the Resources Super Profit Tax should go to the major resource states of WA and Queensland - consistent with each state's share of total mining production.
That is why the Government can announce today that we will be directing a bigger share of the proceeds of a resurgent resources boom back into resource states through critical infrastructure to boost our export capacity across the wider economy.
The Government will therefore establish a new $6 billion Regional Infrastructure Fund.
The Regional Infrastructure Fund will invest in projects with potential partner funding from States, private investors and/or local governments.
The Fund comprises $5.6bn of revenue from the Resources Super Profits Tax commencing in 2012-13, as previously announced.
Today I am pleased to announce an additional $400 million for the fund between 2010-11 and 2013-14.
These are funds that have already been provided for in the Budget.
This takes the total fund to be worth a massive $6 billion.
And it means investment can start now, to address our urgent infrastructure needs, rather than waiting for revenue proceeds of the Resources Super Profits Tax to flow.
Today I also can announce that Western Australia should expect more than $2 billion in additional infrastructure investment from this fund.
That means more rail, roads, ports, and other crucial infrastructure to support the workforce in critical mining regions and in communities that support mining regions.
Infrastructure Australia will be consulted on projects.
Projects will be selected based on the following criteria:
- Promote development and job creation in mining communities, and communities which support the mining sector;
- Provide a clear benefit to Australia's economic development, and to investment in Australia's resource or export capacity;
- Address potential capacity constraints arising from export production and resource projects.
For example, I know that Premier Barnett has identified the need to upgrade infrastructure for the Pilbara Cities of Karratha and Port Hedland - including airport upgrades, water and communications infrastructure, and land servicing.
Another demand is upgrades to road links to the expanded Perth Airport, which is also a critical part of WA's infrastructure to support the mining sector.
It is high time that the regions in this State that generate so much of our national wealth got their fair share of the proceeds of the mining boom - and that is what our tax reform plans will deliver.
Reforming the taxation of resources also constitutes a significant national economic reform.
The existing system of inconsistent state royalty taxes is inefficient and unfair.
It disadvantages mines with higher investment requirements and higher extraction costs.
And it imposes a tax before they've even made a dollar of profit.
The Resources Super Profits Tax will tax profits, not production.
And it won't impose one dollar of tax until companies have made a normal return on investment.
Typical resources projects earning less than 10 per cent returns will therefore pay less tax under this reform - as Treasury's analysis has shown.
Distortions in investment decisions will be reduced, and West Australian resource development will be promoted.
Long-term reforms are rarely popular - but as economists have confirmed, the long-term impact of this reform will be a stronger economy and a stronger mining sector.
It will mean a more secure and comfortable retirement for Australian working families.
In addition, the RSPT will ensure that mining companies pay their fair share for the resources they rent from the Australian people, including the people of WA.
So that when global commodity prices rise and profits boom - as they did earlier this decade, and are doing again now - Australians will get a fair share for our resources.
But if prices moderate and profits fall, as occurred last year, mining companies will also be paying less.
This reform is about efficiency, it's about economic reform, it's about a stronger economy and it's about West Australian families getting their fair share.
The Australian Government is determined to continue the job of building a strong economic future for Western Australia and ensuring West Australian families get a fairer share.
We're continuing with the job of getting the budget back to surplus and delivering better economic opportunities, better health and hospitals and better schools for West Australian families.
And we will ensure this great State of Western Australia and its mining communities benefit from the resources boom you are working so hard to deliver.
I come to this State keen to talk with miners, workers and members of the community about my plans for the future and the details of our Resources Super Profit Tax.
And I've come to this State keen to listen.
But I am sure that through our conversation it will become clear that we believe in and are driven by the same goals.
A resources boom that support all WA companies by lowering company tax.
A resources boom that benefits working families in Western Australia by boosting super.
A resources boom that delivers a $2 billion plus Regional Infrastructure Fund that re-invests that money in WA's future infrastructure needs.
A fair share too for mining companies that take on so much risk and have to strive to be the best in a competitive world.
A fair share for those who work in mining.
A fair share for mining communities that see the benefits but also feel the burdens of rapid economic growth.
A fair share for Western Australia.
And a fair share for the owners of the mineral wealth in the ground - and that's each of us and all of us.


Let me just say a few things and then I understand we're going to have an open set of questions about things near and dear to your hearts.
Firstly, about the role of the churches in Australia in shaping the country that we have become.
I have said throughout my public life that I am proud of the role played by the Christian churches in shaping this country Australia.
Right back to its earliest days and the arrival of the first Christian chaplain in the colony in the First Fleet, Richard Johnson, through to the arrival of the first Catholic priests not long after, and the arrival of various other Christian traditions in this country, the way in which so many of the social institutions of this country have been shaped by the Christian church.
The earliest efforts in bringing about universal education rested on the back of the efforts of the Christian churches. The beginnings of our public hospitals began on the back of the efforts of the Christian churches. The beginnings of basic social institutions such as orphanages, and such as care for the poor, began off the back of the Christian churches.
And the key values which underpin the Judeo-Christian ethic which has been alive in this country for the last two centuries have been shaped so much by the traditions which you represent in this room.
It is often only in the absence of those traditions that you begin to feel what it would be like had Australia been placed differently. That is not to say that those in the Christian traditions have always got it right. You and we have, mistakes have been made by each of the traditions represented in this room. But that should not cause us to conclude that the glass have been overwhelming full rather than empty.
So many people in this country have benefitted from the great tradition of Christian charity and church intervention in society and in people's lives when they have been so singularly distressed. This would be quite a different - and I believe poorer - country were it not for that contribution.
So that is me. It does not mean in this country Australia we are therefore hostile to other religious traditions, we are not.
We are the country which resolved in the 1890s that we would not have an established religion. That reflected the great wisdom of our founding fathers that there should be none and that in fact we should be open to all.
I read some years ago the great debates in the United States at the time following the Revolutionary War as to whether they should have an established religion there, and as soon as the Episcopalians worked out that the Presbyterians were trying to beat them to the jump, they decided they wouldn't have an established religion either. I think there was great wisdom in those deliberations of the 1890s.
And as a consequence in the absence of an established religion, we therefore do welcome, with open arms people of other religious traditions, be they Muslims, be they people of the Jewish tradition, or people of Buddhist faith or other faiths. That is the right and proper thing in a country which respects freedom of religious expression.
And of course in our great Australian family there are those of no faith. And that does not mean that people of no faith therefore have nothing to contribute to debates about morals, to debates about ethics and to debates about values; they do. The great thing about our country Australia is that it tolerates people of faith, of many faiths and those with no faith, and that is the proper workings of a country such as ours rooted in the principles of democracy and respect for the law.
In terms of our engagement with matters I think of real relevance to the churches represented here and those listening to and watching the broadcast, I think one of our first priorities as a Government has been to engage with churches in what you're doing in schools, in the education system of Australia.
We've been out there investing in probably the biggest school modernisation program that this country has ever seen, in fact it is. And we have been completely blind to the question of whether a school is a State school or a non-State school, a Government school or a non-Government school, a Catholic school or a Christian school, an independent Christian school, an Anglican school or whatever school.
The key thing is as I travel around the country is how so many schools, run by churches, which have frankly been struggling to make sure that they've got the most up to date facilities. Basic things like libraries, basic things like learning centres, basic things like science centres, state of the art language centres. And I would like to simply emphasise one core point - that as we have done this as part of our national economic stimulus strategy, we have done so to make sure that all Australians, wherever they go to school, wherever they choose to send their children to school, have been benefitted from this program.
I was in Melbourne not long ago opening a school, a Catholic parish school called St Luke the Evangelist - hi to anyone who happens to be watching from St Luke the Evangelist this evening. But what gave me a particular delight in opening their new learning centre was the fact that as the parish priest, a delightful Irish-Australian said, 'we've been a little bit down of heel at late, we haven't had a new building for 40 years'. And that gives my heart genuine joy when I see those changes occurring on the ground.
Also in the state school system of Australia, you know that the Government has supported the continuation of the school chaplaincy program. It's been a matter of some controversy in various parts of the country. The reason we've decided to support its continuation is because we actually think it's the right thing to do.
In my experience of chaplaincies on the ground they perform a very, very good role. Some schools may choose, through their parent communities, not to have one, that's their choice. If they wish to use that funding to support a school counsellor of no particular religious tradition that's their choice,.
But I am pretty pleased by the extent to which this has been taken up right across the country. We'll go through our own evaluation as to whether it works everywhere well. I'm told by every school community I go to it's working fantastically well, but we need to measure that because it involves the expenditure of Government funds.
But I'm pretty confident this program is going to continue because I see from so many of our school principals, and some of the most hardened and difficult high schools in our country, and some of the primary schools who are dealing with real challenges in various parts of Australia, how much they value the role of a school chaplain who has formed something of the social glue, the spiritual glue, of a school community.
So I hope through those specific actions - what we've done on chaplaincies, what we've done more broadly on school building programs - and our broader continued investment in the non-Government education system, that you'll be clear that our bona fides are real.
Another great contribution of course by the churches has been what you do in the area of health, hospitals and broader support for those with disabilities.
We've taken this challenge to heart as a Government. I said prior to the last election that I feared that our health and hospital system may not survive unless we fundamentally reformed it. I know some will see this as a political debate. To me it's a debate about human decency - that anyone who is sick, irrespective of where they come from, should be able to have access to first class health care.
So our reforms to bring in a new National Health and Hospitals Network is part and parcel of that. For the first time the Australian Government will be the dominant funder of the public hospital system of Australia - first time. In the past State Governments have provided one third, on average, of the running costs. We now will be the 60 per cent funder of the capital costs, the running costs, the teaching costs, the research costs, the training costs of hospitals.
We're also going to become the exclusive funder of the primary healthcare system - that is, the system outside of hospitals, and, for the first time, the exclusive funder of the aged care network of Australia.
These are big reforms, and I am concerned that in the absence of having done these reforms that the system would have simply reached tipping point as state governments are increasingly incapable, frankly, of funding the future needs of the public hospital system.
Which brings me to another challenge which I believe we share in common, and that is how do we deal with the problem of homelessness and affordable housing.
For us as a government this is pretty basic. We've set ourselves a target of halving homelessness. The Census statistic says that as of a couple of years ago that we had something like 100,000 Australians out there homeless; some 10,000 Australians each night sleeping rough.
That strikes me as off. It shouldn't be the case. We're a wealthy country. We should be able to do better than that.
You know, as representatives of the Christian churches, there are some folk who are sometimes very hard to help and I understand that too. But you know, when I go round to the homeless centres of Australia, and I've been to a lot in the last two and a half years I've been in this position, and I ask them 'have they got enough room at the inn?', they usually don't. They are turning people away. Often, for one person accepted, nine are turned away. That should not be the case. We need to change that.
One of the things that we are changing is we're now investing in 20,000 new units of social housing right across Australia as part of the Government's economic stimulus strategy. We're also fixing up tens of thousands of others which have actually fallen into disrepair and were no longer properly habitable.
We're also working with the non-government sector in projects like Common Ground. Common Ground, in our large cities, is in a process now of building a number of free-standing, hotel-like accommodation at the lowest level for people who need, literally, somewhere to stay the night. It's modelled on what's happened in New York and other cities in the United States.
My wife, Therese, who is heavily involved in this, will be opening the first of those facilities, I think, in the next month or two in Melbourne, I think, and that is happening around the rest of the country as well.
Also, investing in homelessness programs because, as you know, homelessness itself is usually a final manifestation of a whole bunch of other problems, whether it's mental illness, whether it's family breakdown, or whether it's problems with criminality, and all these things tend to connected. And so, there is also a large investment from the Government through the outreach of church, charitable and community organisations to do something about the causes of homelessness. How do you actually prevent people from falling into homelessness through better debt management just before the house is literally returned to the bank? How do you actually help people train and become trained to enter the workforce in order to become more resilient and self-reliant?
This is a very big investment by the Australian Government and something about which I feel passionately, because no Australian should have to sleep rough at night. We shouldn't be a country like that. We should be able to do better. And so partnering with you in the church and charitable sector for us is pretty important on that front as well.
We're also pretty, shall I say, hardline on the question of welfare as well. We don't believe that simply extending a welfare cheque is the end of the Government's responsibility. The welfare reforms that we're about to introduce in the Northern Territory are profound. These impose a whole series of new conditionalities, not just for Indigenous Australians, but now for non-indigenous Australians as well on a non-discriminatory basis in the Northern Territory, and prospectively, depending on how that goes, for the country at large, that people who are on welfare long-term actually have to meet a whole series of new conditions with the objective of bringing them off welfare.
This welfare reform is tough, it's hard. It's also compassionate. It's trying to get the balance right. But we believe that intergenerational welfare dependency is just wrong. It's actually bad for people.
And therefore I would draw your attention carefully to what we have just outlined in the parliament in the last week or so about our program for welfare reform, starting with the entire community in the Territory, but moving progressively to the rest of the country, depending on the success of those particular reforms.
In the workplace, you probably know which tradition we come from on that score. We actually believe fairness and the great Australian fair go belief is based on and anchored in a fair go for all in the workplace; that you should have an opportunity to bargain for the conditions that you've got at work.
We had real concerns with the previous set of laws, called WorkChoices. We didn't think that was right and fair.
We became very concerned when people's right at work were being traded away down to nothing, and that the most defenceless people, those in the lowest-paid occupations, were not getting a fair go - losing their penalty rates, losing their shift allowances, losing their overtime.
So, for us that's pretty basic as well. That's why we said, prior to the last election, we'd get rid of Work Choices, and that's why we have done that. It's a pretty basic difference between us.
And, speaking of work, the availability of jobs itself is for us a pretty fundamental belief. People think that this global financial crisis that the world has gone through in the last 18 months or so has somehow just passed Australia by, almost by accident or by miracle. It didn't. We actually chose to step into the economy and make a difference.
I've already spoken about this school building program - that's $15 billion worth of investment, partly to provide jobs for tradies, for small businesses, right across the country when the building sector was actually collapsing; partly also to make sure that your schools would have a lasting and positive legacy from this investment. But our fundamental driving factor was not to see mass unemployment.
Right round the world today, if you're a pastor in a church somewhere in the American mid-west, to the south, you'd be staring at double-digit unemployment and above. Right across the UK and Europe at present, you're seeing manifestations of unemployment between 8 and 18 and 19 per cent.
Here, we chose to make a difference, and through the measures that we took to stimulate the economy, amidst huge controversy, we actually kept the economy out of recession. But most importantly we kept hundreds of thousands of Australians in work. The thought of creating a generation of people thrown out of work with a decade to come back and to recover, and perhaps never recover, was something we didn't want to see.
The dignity of having a job is, for us, a fundamental human dignity, and that is why we acted in the way we did, and the result is pretty plain. Australia has 5.2 per cent unemployment. It's the second-lowest unemployment level of all the major advanced economies.
Had we generated in Australia the unemployment rate we now see in the United States - it's just under 10 - half a million Australians more would be out of work. Our total workforce is about 10 or 11 million. That's a lot of people.
Imagine what would be happening in each of your parishes, in each of your church communities, if such a large slice of people, frankly, weren't able to work and properly cater for their families and their basic needs.
So, protecting jobs, particularly through this extraordinary, abnormal global economic event has been a fundamental value of this Government at work.
Also, our action on climate change. There's been much debate about this. Our view is very simple - climate change is real, it's happening, and we cannot simply put our heads into the sand and pretend that it's not.
In terms of action on climate change, we've put forward three or four concrete measures. One, an emissions trading scheme as a good way to actually bring down, the most effective and cheapest way of bringing down greenhouse gas emissions. We put our proposed legislation to the parliament three times, and three times it was voted down by our political opponents, and of course it therefore requires a new parliament to deal with it.
The other way you act on climate change is to radically invest in renewable energy - solar, wind, geothermal - and we we're doing that, the biggest renewable energy investment the country has ever seen.
Thirdly, energy efficiency, so we actually consume less and we are proper custodians of a sustainable planet.
And, beyond that, to work globally, because what we do here nationally represents 1.5 per cent of global emissions, so, with the Chinese, with the Indians, with the Americans and others to make sure that the planet is pulling together.
Copenhagen was a hard conference, but it was a necessary conference, because if we take, I believe, carefully the requirement on this generation to be proper stewards of God's creation it means that we should act responsibly in the care of this planet and this creation as well.
So we will continue to work on those agendas as well.
As I know I've been given the bell, and I think it's probably about time to wind up, I just finish on one point. These are some of the actions we've undertaken at home, here within this wider community called Australia. Wesley, the father and Methodist, said, when asked what his parish was and where his parish was, said quite correctly that the world was his parish, and so too it is in terms of our wider responsibilities.
We are proudly, in this country and under this Government, increasing our level of overseas development cooperation to 0.5 per cent of gross national income. What's that mean in practical terms? We've increased was we gift to the rest of the world from $3.2 billion when the Government was elected to now about $4.4-$4.5 billion. This has been a big change.
We are now engaged in aid programs in Africa. In the past, there were very few. We have now used the Millennium Development Goals and through the Micah Challenge and others supporting that to make a difference to extreme poverty around the world and within our own region. In partnership with the rest of the world, I think we can make a difference.
Therefore, what we do at home should also be reflected in that which we seek to do abroad.
There are many other things I'm sure that you'll wish to ask about, whether it's about asylum seekers or whether it's about questions of broader morality or other concerns which you as churches would have, and I'm pleased to seek to answer each of those questions.
I thank you very much.


Thank you very much.
To Vice President Xi Jinping, members of your delegation, fellow Members of Parliament, friends of Australia, friends of China, ladies and gentlemen.
It gives me great pleasure to launch the 2010 Australia-China Trade and Economic Cooperation Forum.
I hope Australia's welcome to our friends from China has been warm enough to protect you from Canberra's cold weather.
The overwhelming enthusiasm of today's forum and with so many people here present, and the scale of the Chinese delegation that is here today, is a reflection of Australia and China's shared commitment to our trade and economic ties.
As you saw recently during the worst economic downturn in 75 years, if we are going to face the global economic challenges of our time, then we must do so together. At a time when international trade was suffering, total trade between Australia and China grew by 15.1 per cent to $85 billion in 2009.
Merchandising (inaudible) from China grew even as Australia's total imports fell and our resource exports to China boomed taking Australia's merchandise exports up by over 30 per cent to more than $42 billion.
I could go on citing figures but the long and short of it is that these gains came about through the hard work and commitment of all of you here in this room. People who understand the promise of not just strong economic relations but of also building the people-to-people ties which underpin them.
For this and for the service you have done for the Australian and Chinese people, by expanding bilateral cooperation on trade and economic matters I thank you.
As I watched the opening ceremony at the Beijing Olympics in 2008 I saw China emerging on to the world stage. The remarkable transformations that we've seen in China were on display for all to see, these changes are of world significance. Our relationship stretches back a long time but we have a strong future ahead of us as well, and I'd encourage each person here to participate in this dialogue which is so important to our trade and economic relationships.


Well, good morning to you all.
I understand you were locked out in the cold this morning. This was a pre-determined plan to test your level of Christian commitment to social justice. It was not an accident. Sorry about that. I'm sure you'll recover with something warm to drink and to eat fairly soon.
Micah Challenge has asked for something pretty basic but deeply profound - to do justice, to love mercy and to walk humbly with your God.
This is often a challenging environment in which to walk humbly with your God. That's the parliament building.
To do justice, to love mercy, these are big and fundamental challenges for all people of conscience.
Mention was made just before of Wilberforce and many of us have seen the film; some of us have read his biography; some of us have read more about his life. What strikes me about people like Wilberforce and those who at that time and before him, campaigned for social justice was that they were all told at the time it was impossible; that it couldn't be done; that if you change these things it would so fundamentally wreck the economy and the existing social order that it wasn't worth trying; and even if you were sympathetic to the cause, somehow, somehow, it was just so far off into the future that you could never get there.
Well, people like Shaftesbury said no, we can make a difference. People like Wilberforce said no, we can make a difference. People who said one day that women should have the vote, they also made a difference. People who said that vote should be extended to all human beings, whatever their property class, they, too, believed they could make a difference. And in each of their cases, whether it was the repeal of the Child Factory Act, whether it was the introduction of laws to prevent the sending of children down into mines, whether it was laws to ensure that mines could be worked in with safety, and factories, laws which repealed slavery, laws which enabled all people to participate in the democratic society of nations, all these were made possible because men and women decided to make a difference. That's what impresses me about you good folk here today in making poverty history and the underpinnings of it through the Micah Challenge.
Some sometimes argue that the question of social justice and the alleviation and the elimination of extreme poverty are just too hard and too far off. You know something? I think that's wrong.
I think each and every one of you here are demonstrations of the fact that you believe that's wrong. I think each and every one of you here sees yourself as a change-maker in the world today.
Those of you who have signed up for the Micah Challenge, and if my memory serves me well more than 100,000 of you across the country, are out there as individual ambassadors for change in each of your local communities: in the face of local politicians; in the face of your local community leaders; in the face of your local newspapers, causing them to conclude that this isn't just something which hangs of the edge or at the extremes of what's possible or normal in our national and local political life, but it actually is fundamental.
So, I thank you for the work that you've done: for the meetings you've held; the engagements you've had; and the fact that you're here in Canberra today to be in the face of our nation's politicians as well, because it's important that you do so. This place is full of competing priorities. What's important? How do we spend our nation's resources? What should we give our time to? You are constantly out there as this nagging, prophetic voice.
If you read the history of folk like Micah and the Old Testament prophets, they could be real nags. Jeremiah, Isaiah, Micah, Amos - these were in your face types. They didn't have a lot of popularity at the time, by the way, either, in your face types. So, can I say to each and every one of you, it's good, the work that you're doing.
The Millennium Development Goals are the practical mechanism through which we engage as countries of the world to make that difference. There's no point going out there and re-inventing the wheel. The MDGs are there. They are the product of the crafting of agreement between governments going back to the Millennium Summit, and we're now 10 years into the Millennium.
These are basic goals, eight of them, and they go to very basic measures about whether we are making a difference to extreme poverty. That is why we have embraced them as an Australian Government. That's why they've formed the structure through which we explain what we are doing in terms of our international development assistance effort.
There's no point re-inventing the wheel. They should be our framework. That's why we've now incorporated that framework of the MDGs into what we're doing with each and every one of the Island countries of the Pacific. We've done that over the last two years.
How do we measure whether we're making progress or not? Well, the MDGs actually provide a mechanism for doing that. You're either improving the figures on infant mortality, for maternal death, or you're not. It's very measurable.
Of course, having a way in which you measure these things and a way in which you organise your efforts, that's one thing. The second one is whether you're making an effort as well.
Prior to the last election I said we'd commit to 0.5 by 2015-16. That is a commitment from which I believe none of us can move. I thank the Leader of the Opposition and those who have preceded him in his position for committing them to that goal as well. It's really important, and so in the last two years our overseas development assistance contribution has gone from, I think, $3.1 billion to $4.3 billion as a result. The most recent budget - more than half a billion dollars more. We're on track to realise that 0.5 goal, and if you know where we started from, it's been a long distance to travel.
Every Finance Minister and every Treasurer of the country will rail against this. I don't think it's right to do that, and that's why we're on track to reach that. We know there is more to do.
To do justice, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with your God. A year or so ago Tim Costello gave me this version of the Bible, a Poverty and Justice Bible. You'll be familiar with it.
Sometimes people think this is just one of those marginal things, also, even in the teaching of the Christian scriptures. It's not. There are 2,000 verses in this Bible which are all about the injunction for each of us to do justice and to love mercy and to make a difference for the poor.
So, thank you, each and every one of you, for making a difference for the poor. Your advocacy on the ground is effective. You've made the nation's political leadership listen, so when you go back to your communities and the schools from which you come, just tell them this one thing - you have made a difference, you are making a difference, and together we will make a difference in eliminating extreme poverty across the world.
That is our nation's ambition and the ambition of all people of conscience, everywhere.


It is with profound sadness that I inform the House that a helicopter carrying Coalition forces went down in Khandahar province in Afghanistan today.
There were ten Australian servicemen on board.
It's my sad responsibility to inform the House that three Australian Commandos from the Special Operations Task Group have been killed.
Seven other Australian servicemen are wounded, two of them very seriously.
This is a tragic day for Australia and for the Australian Defence Force.
It is a day of the deepest sorrow for the friends and families of those who have lost their loved ones in this tragedy.
I express to all of them the deepest condolences of the Australian Government and the Australian people.
Our thoughts are also with those who have been wounded.
I want them and their families to know that they will receive the best possible medical care.
This tragedy brings to sixteen those Australians who have lost their lives serving our country in Afghanistan.
This is a very heavy price to pay, particularly for the families of those brave Australians who have lost their lives.
We know our mission in Afghanistan is hard, but this mission is critical for our common security.
We work alongside our allies from the United States and from other NATO countries to avoid Afghanistan once again becoming a breeding ground for terrorists who can then strike at innocent Australians both at home and abroad.
It is our nation's highest calling to wear the uniform of Australia.
Those who wear it do outstanding work for Australia and they do that outstanding work in this most difficult, demanding and dangerous of environments.
Today we recall their service as we mourn the loss of some of Australia's finest.
The commitment, the dedication and sacrifice of those soldiers will not be forgotten.
It will never be forgotten.
All Australians owe them a debt of gratitude for their service and for their sacrifice.
Our thoughts and our prayers are with the families and friends of those who have fallen.
We mourn them, we pay tribute to them, we pay tribute to them having paid the ultimate sacrifice for our nation. 


I acknowledge the First Australians on whose land we meet, and whose cultures we celebrate as among the oldest continuing cultures in human history.
Let me first congratulate Lenore Taylor and David Uren for this book.
This is an important contribution to contemporary political history.
Just as Laura Tingle wrote a defining account of Australia's recession of the early '90s in Chasing The Future - so Lenore and David have written a defining account of Australia's response to the global recession of the late 2000s.
Of course there is a great difference in those two episodes of recent economic history.
In the early '90s, Australia struggled with a recession that was more severe than many other economies.
In the more recent global recession, compared to others Australia has of course done far better.
And this is the story why.
Some elements of the story will be familiar, though already they seem a long time ago.
The weeks of September 2008 when the crisis broke and Lehmann failed.
The sequence of emergency measures, first in the United States and then across the world.
And the emergency responses here in Australia and in other nations.
Lenore and David bring all those events together into a fast-paced narrative.
But their research has also dug up quite a bit that most of us hadn't heard before.
We learn that as the tidal wave of the global recession headed to Australian shores, with Treasurer Wayne Swan in the United States meeting with other Finance Ministers, he took part in the critical cabinet meetings deciding on the stimulus on a phone hookup.
But not a phone hookup in a wood-panelled embassy room in Washington DC - but from a teenage boy's bedroom in Maryland, surrounded by posters of rock legends, because that was the only place the embassy could provide the Treasurer with a secure line.
We also read that one of Australia's leading financial economists, Professor Ian Harper, spent a weekend doing interviews in October 2008 assuring people about the safety of Australia's financial system - and then he promptly raced down the street to the closest ATM to take out as much cash as he could in case of a financial collapse.
We also find that it seems whenever financial markets were collapsing, invariably those events seemed disrupt exotic holidays that bank executives were enjoying in the most remote corners of the world.
These are the discoveries you make with the kind of substantive research that Lenore and David have undertaken.
The early chapters remind us that when the Government was elected in November 2007, we came to office with an ambitious agenda.
We did not imagine that within nine months we would face a full-blown financial crisis.
Lenore and David fully capture the drama and crisis of those weeks in late 2008.
And I can tell you, from someone at the centre of Australia's response to that crisis - the drama was more than anyone could ever wish for - it was a white-knuckle ride.
As world leaders who were speaking to each other every day throughout that period, we contemplated the collapse of the global financial system and the global economy.
As a global economy, we screeched to the edge of the cliff, and we leaned over.
Only narrowly did we pull back from the edge.
Let's remember the scale of the crisis.
- In the first 12 months of this recession, global stock markets fell by more than 40 per cent off their peak - nearly twice their fall during the first 12 months of the Great Depression.
- Global industrial output fell by around 13 per cent from the peak in April 2008 - as bad as in the first 12 months of the Great Depression.
- And global trade fell by 17 per cent this time - almost double the 10 per cent fall in the first 12 months of the Great Depression.
More recently, some have sought to downplay the extent to which this crisis threatened Australian families.
And of course downplaying that threat suits the political interests of some.
But as Lenore and David say, it was:
"arguably the greatest threat the country had faced since World War II...
"it was the worst crisis financial markets had ever seen...The complete collapse of the world financial system appeared a real prospect, with incalculable consequences."
Those incalculable consequences included the risk of a "death spiral" among Australian financial institutions.
Had that happened, it would have wreaked havoc for small businesses, depositors, home owners and the wider Australian economy.
And that's why we were determined to act, and act decisively.
Lenore and David say that the Government's response showed "extraordinarily early planning compared with other governments around the world".
I just call it doing what we had to do.
With everything within our powers, we were determined to leave nothing to chance.
Because we had lived through the recessions of the early '80s and again the early '90s.
- We'd seen the effects on 50-something blokes in factories who one day got a pink slip and never worked another day in their lives.
- We'd seen a generation of kids frozen out of jobs and apprenticeships as unemployment climbed beyond 10 per cent.
- And we'd known families who struggled to stay together through the terrible difficulties of selling up the family home, pulling kids out of schools and seeing a lifetime of dreams turn to dust.
We knew we couldn't insulate Australia completely from the global recession.
But if we acted decisively, we could cushion the impacts on working families.
We could apply the lessons from past downturns.
And that's what we did.
As Lenore and David say repeatedly - if the Government hadn't acted decisively, Australia would have gone into recession.
Just as North America did.
Just as Europe did.
Just as south-east Asian economies did.
And just as New Zealand did.
And just as Australia would have done if the Liberals had been in office.
That is the blunt reality.
The Liberals opposed the stimulus.
They underestimated the risks for Australian families.
They got their analysis of the global financial crisis fundamentally wrong.
And had they been in office, hundreds of thousands more Australians would still be out of work today, and thousands of small business would have gone to the wall.
Lenore and David make the point that perhaps the Government has suffered politically because we acted so quickly that many Australians today aren't even aware of the threat we faced:
"Australia bore the recession very lightly... The reality is that people only factor in what they know. Those whose jobs were saved don't know who they are and, even if they did, would be hard pressed in most cases to draw the link between retaining their employment and the Government's actions."
That's a judgment for others.
But for Wayne and me, and for this Government, working to protect Australian families from threats like the global financial crisis are why we're in public life.
It's why we're Labor.
We belong to a political tradition that grew out of the suffering of working people in the Depression of the 1890s.
That has stood up for working families through the booms and busts of the economic cycle.
And that believes in the power of governments to protect people when markets fail.
As a Labor government, that's in our DNA and it's why we did what we had to do.
So where does this leave us today, nearly two years after the crisis unfolded?
Let's imagine for a moment if the Australian Government had not acted as we did.
Imagine where we would be today.
We'd be just where the governments of many other advanced nations are.
- Facing years of hard, grinding efforts to get hundreds of thousands of people out of long-term unemployment and back into the workforce.
- Experiencing the erosion of our capital base and our skills base when investment dries up and people lose their jobs.
- Dealing with a much larger budget challenge because of the high costs of unemployment, lower tax receipts and a less productive economy.
But that's not where we are today.
Australia has come through the global recession stronger than almost any other advanced economy.
That's why I don't accept the passing remark in the book that "there is depressingly little to show" for our stimulus, in terms of its contribution to productive capacity.
I don't think the facts support that contention.
Of course if we'd had more infrastructure projects sitting on the shelf and ready to go, then we'd have gone ahead with those.
But when we came into office, that work simply hadn't been done - the previous Government had neglected its responsibility for national infrastructure for 12 years.
It's simply not true to say the stimulus investments won't contribute to a more productive economy.
Investments in rail track and new rail lines; in roads; in super-fast broadband; in our schools and universities - these are real investments - essential investments - that will build a more productive economy.
And investments in social housing and community infrastructure deliver lasting benefits to working families across the nation.
Tens of thousands of those homes were in shocking disrepair and we've fixed them - and the whole purpose of building a strong economy is that you can take action and make life better for Australians who are doing it tough.
Because of our stimulus plan, Australia has higher skills base, contributing to higher long term productivity.
More children have grown up in homes with a parent who holds down a job.
The stimulus was never just about savings jobs now.
It was also about saving human capital for a generation, and strengthening our enduring social fabric.
So that we continue to build a stronger economy and deliver fairness for working families into the future.
We acted rapidly to keep the economy going - to stop it going over the cliff.
So mistakes were made along the way. 
It's important to learn from those mistakes - and that's what we're doing. 
But today, our national debate in Australia is not the debate that's going on in other countries.
It's not a debate about suburbs full of streets of empty homes that have gone through foreclosure.
It's not about how we restore the livelihoods of working Australians who lost their jobs and are still unemployed today.
And it's not about how we deal with hundreds of thousands of kids who have never had a day's work in their lives.
Instead, it's about the big challenges of the future - and how an ambitious government gets on with the job of delivering better health, better hospitals, better schools and a fair share of the proceeds of the mining booms for Australian families.
How we build a national health and hospitals network that can meet the needs of an ageing population in the decades ahead.
How we reform our tax system, so that we have better superannuation and more secure retirement for Australians; competitive company tax rates; and taxation of our resources sector that ensures Australians get their fair shares of the proceeds of the next phase of the mining boom.
These debates aren't easy debates - reform is never easy - but they are crucial to our future.
And we're able to get on with these debates, because we're not facing years of recovery from recession.
So with those initial reflections, let me again congratulate Louise Adler and the team at MUP for another great book.
Across the country, bookshelves are weighed down with the weight of MUP's publishing scoops of the last few years.
Well done again.
And congratulations to Lenore and David.
This is an important contribution to Australian political history and Australian political economy.
I'm delighted to launch Shitstorm.


Yesterday afternoon I advised the House of the accident involving a coalition helicopter in southern Afghanistan in the early hours of Monday morning. I informed the House that, tragically, three Australian commandos from the Special Operations Task Group were killed in that crash. Seven were wounded. The United States has confirmed one of their personnel was killed and three other soldiers were wounded. In addition, a civilian interpreter who was travelling with the Australian element was wounded.
All seven injured soldiers are in the Kandahar military facility. The Australian Defence Force continues to ensure that they receive the best possible medical attention. I am advised that the most recent assessment of the seven wounded soldiers is that two are in a very serious condition. One of those soldiers has sustained a very serious head injury. Both these soldiers are in intensive care. The five other soldiers are now listed as being in a satisfactory condition. Six of the seven soldiers have undergone surgery. The medical authorities have not yet made any decision as to when any of the injured soldiers will be moved to the NATO medical facility in Germany. Any move will only be taken when the condition of the soldiers allows.
The names of the fallen soldiers have not yet been released. As the House would be aware, there are protocols in the Department of Defence which apply in these circumstances. The department will only release the names of the soldiers when they have approval from all the families involved. This is a terrible time for them and we need to respect their privacy. With regard to the wounded soldiers, they are Special Forces and, as a result, they have protected identity status. This means their names cannot be released.
The cause of the incident is yet to be determined. It would be inappropriate to speculate until the investigation into the incident has been completed. I am advised that this incident was not caused by insurgent action. I am also advised that casualties occurred when the aircraft crashed heavily to the ground.
Defence is making arrangements for the repatriation of the three fallen soldiers later this week.
Today, let me reiterate that the thoughts and the prayers of all Australians are with the families, friends and colleagues of those involved in this incident.
These are hard days - very hard days - but I wish to reaffirm to the House the government's commitment that we will complete this mission in Afghanistan. Fundamental national interests are at stake, national interests which go to the security of us all and the security of our friends and allies. We therefore will stay the course and complete the mission which we have embarked upon in Afghanistan.


Thanks very much Grant for those words of very warm welcome and known in Queensland as irony. First of all can I acknowledge all of you who are captains of industry here with whom we have had a long and productive relationship over a long period of time. I notice many of the representatives of the banking industry are here this evening for example, with whom I have just spent the better part of the last hour discussing what I believe is fundamental to every business in this room, and that is the future cost of capital in this country.
We have just been through a global financial crisis. The global financial crisis required extraordinary interventions by Government in order to underpin the continued stability of our financial system and the businesses which depend on it. That required a range of measures. It required us uniquely as a Government to intervene in the economy, for the first time to provide a sovereign guarantee for every single Australian's bank deposit to underpin confidence in the system.
Secondly, for the banks here represented, to also provide a guarantee for their wholesale funding requirements of global credit markets (inaudible.) And thirdly on top of that, given the damage to the real economy, to then intervene to prevent an entire collapse of private demand in the economy in order to prevent the economy from tail-spinning into recession, which occurred in 32 of the other 33 OECD economies. These were extraordinary interventions by Government.
The result and the report card I think, as those of you in this room have acknowledged, has been reasonable. We've emerged as one of the only OECD economies not to go into recession. We have kept growth positive. We have the second lowest unemployment rate of all the major advanced economies and the lowest debt and the lowest deficit. In terms of a report card of basic economic credibility I don't think that's too bad; there is always room for improvement, but it is however measured against the performances of other economies confronted with similar challenges.
The key one which for us has been fundamental is actually keeping people in jobs. Mention has just been made of the mining industry, let me talk to you about the employment performance of the mining industry in the last twelve months. The mining industry contracted its employment load by about 19 per cent last year in the face of what was occurring in the general economy, or more like 15 to 16 per cent. But if it was replicated more broadly across the economy, the total unemployment level in this country would have been something in the order of 15 to 20 per cent. Mining represents employment directly of about 100,000 Australians, 15,000 of them actually lost their jobs last year.
What we did was step into the breach and make sure that private demand kept up and through public investment that overall employment kept up. For those of your companies which depend therefore on the vibrancy of the private economy and the overall performance of our economy in difficult global circumstances, this I think has been a reasonable achievement.
There's a second part though which arises from that, it's a consequence. What Governments are required to do globally in part cause extreme increases in the levels of sovereign debt around the world. Such that we now have a global debate about the sustainability of levels of sovereign debt in Europe and elsewhere. We all know the story of Greece, which is not one relevant to the immediate financial crisis, but what Greece has unfolded is a level of nervousness in markets and bond markets in particular about the sustainability of public debt levels around the world.
That of course brings us back to what will be an important set of discussions which I'll be attending on Australia's behalf this weekend in Toronto, the G20. The G20 will be deliberating on a series of financial reforms which will go down to the cost of capital for each business represented in this room. The proposals which have been forward by Europeans and others, who've had a much less happy experience of the global recession that we have, are intense, they are regulatory and they are prescriptive and of the type and order of magnitude that unless we stand firmly in the Australian national economic interest, will have a profound impact on the cost of capital in this country over time. We intend to discharge our responsibilities in the national economic interest.
Our country has emerged well from this crisis, through good regulators, through a good regulatory system and also through a Government which worked very closely with the regulators at a time of crisis. Therefore looking forward my first responsibility in this country and that of the Government is not just to maintain the stability of the financial system, but in order also to protect it from excessive global regulatory intervention which will drive the cost of capital up. And that in turn would impede global economic activity.
There are four specific items of the Toronto agenda which will flow through to the G20 agenda in Korea at the end of the year. Each of these goes directly to the cost of capital. As various economies around the world, most particularly in Europe and North America seek to insure themselves against future systemic risk against future crisis, the problem is, for economies like ours, and financial systems like ours which have emerged so well, it is that were those burdens to be applied on us, then the impact in fact would be simply of a type which would cause the cost of loans both for business and other purposes to go through the roof, if left unattended to.
So our first responsibility in the last year and a half was actually to keep this economy going, to keep our financial system afloat and to deal with the consequences of those actions through what has happened in the rising levels of global sovereign debt and the consequential actions now by regulators across the world and G20 leaders, not all of them, who seek to regulate private capital in a manner which could have unintended consequences elsewhere.
So that's our first responsibility, maintain macroeconomic stability, maintain integrity in the financial system.
A second responsibility we have beyond all of that is to ensure that we are building in this economy long term productivity growth. Saving the economy from recession is one thing, building for future growth is another thing. That is very much the agenda upon which we were elected, and that agenda is about how do you build sustainable productivity growth for the future of the Australian economy. What are the levers available to us?
When it comes to productivity the equation is actually pretty basic. How do you make labour more productive by instilling in it greater skills, greater education, greater training? How do you also make sure that the infrastructure available to labour is there so that the labour input into a given productive enterprise is used and deployed maximally in the greatest efficiency? And the infrastructure deficit of this country is known and known well.
The third thing you can do is get out of the hair of business to greatest extent possible by removing the regulatory burden. What we have done against all those three measures in the two and a half years that we've been in Government I believe has been substantial.
On the first measure, education, skills and training, the Deputy Prime Minister is here. We've increased our investment in schools alone by 50 per cent in our first couple of years in office. This is a substantial increase because what we do through early childhood education, what we do through schools, what we do through education, training, universities, TAFE and the rest is of fundamental importance in the quality of the labour force which emerges for you to use later on. And there's a great danger that we were simply falling behind. This has been a big quantitative investment.
The qualitative reforms have also been significant. Again the Deputy Prime Minister has been engaged in what I could describe as visible and occasionally audible fisticuffs with various teachers unions around the country to make sure that we in fact had consistent, mandatory national testing of students across the country and mandatory transparent public reporting of the performance of schools. Unless you get that right, dealing just with the basics of literacy and numeracy, quite apart from the other ranges of skills which are needed for the future, we're always going to be held back in terms of our productivity. This is a big reform. It's been undergone, often below the radar, occasionally above the radar.
Then on infrastructure. You've seen the calculations of infrastructure deficit in this country, they are huge. For the first time the Australian Government has appointed a Minister for Infrastructure. For the first time we've established a outfit call Infrastructure Australia, for the first time a rational analysis of the current infrastructure deficit across all of its elements: road, rail, ports and the rest, has been undertaken. For the first time we have a national priority list of infrastructure projects which need to be attended to. This is pretty fundamental to making sure that we have maximum productivity in the future, and the biggest and best piece of infrastructure that we are about to deliver will come through the National Broadband Network.
I see David Thodey here this evening from Telstra. We've been in an arm wrestle with Telstra for how long? A long time and he looks much happier than he did this time last week. But can I say this has been a good negotiation, the product of what actually good negotiations can produce if there is good will all round. And this has actually produced that, and it's produced a real result, good for the Telstra shareholders but good for the country and good for the economy.
We're going to have a National Broadband Network, it's going to be an open access network. We've finally after 20 years resolved the question of structural separation from wholesale networks to retail providers. This is a fundamental microeconomic reform, and Stephen Conroy is here with us this evening, he should be personally congratulated for his efforts. It's been a strong, hard effort put in by him and supported by our friends in Telstra in bringing about the conclusion which we saw announced on Sunday.
I cannot think of an Australia of the 21st century absent a state of the art broadband network. When we were elected in 2007, we had the third most expensive broadband of the OECD, the third most expensive. We also had a speed of the network which was about 35 times slower than that which was available to the fastest broadband providers in the OECD. That was the baseline that we inherited in 2007.
We set to work, we announced a plan, we said we were going to have a National Broadband Network, we said we'd invest up to $43 billion, we actually believe this is the infrastructure of the 21st century, just as railways, roads and the rest, telegraph, were in the 19th century and in the 20th century.
This is an important investment for the future, from which each of the businesses represented in this room will benefit enormously, in ways which the economy at large hasn't by and large thought through yet. New ways of doing business, new ways in which you can actually sell products across the tyranny of distance which has so far haunted so much of our small business community, or those which are geographically isolated from major markets both here and abroad. This is a fantastic innovation. Also for the way in which Government does business in delivering basic and efficient services and saving public finance, for example in simply the ability to transfer electronically and at speed, patient controlled electronic health records.
This is a turbo-charging piece of infrastructure which this Government has brought about and is important because unless we have infrastructure at global standards, unless we have skills at global standards, we will not have productivity growth at global standards.
Which brings me to my third point, on what we've been doing the last two and a half years. I often scratch my head about what our predecessors did for their twelve years in office on the question of regulatory reform, I really do. When we came to office we embarked upon a program which largely the BCA have been supporting, which is to identify those areas of regulatory disharmony across the Federation, six states, two territories and everything from occupational health and safety down to product specifications and job classifications and occupation classifications. And we said 'this is nuts, this is crazy, how do we fix it'. And we set up, and I see Craig Emerson is up the back here, he's been a driving force in this together with the Finance Minister Lindsay Tanner, in making sure that we made this happen. 27 hair-pulling-out working groups of the Council of Australia Governments, pushing each one of these reforms through. How many have we landed so far Craig, out of the 27? One third will be landed by 1 July this year.
If you know anything of the complexity of these negotiations, let me tell you they are enough to cause grown men and women to cry, but we have prevailed, we have been persistent and occasionally we've used intelligently, effectively, affectionately and diplomatically, the fiscal leverage of the Commonwealth.
The important is delivering the outcome, and I look as something as basic as occupational health and safety, about which so many of your businesses have complained for years and years and years, and this Government has actually delivered that, minus the WA Government.
Regulatory reform is something we've been on about because our objective and our mission statement of Government is very clear, a seamless national economy, a seamless national economy with covering off the infrastructure deficit, creating infrastructure of the 21st century, as well as producing the best skilled, best trained and best educated workforce in the world. That's our mission statement for productivity growth.
Let me go on to a third point, which is what else do you do given the current structure of our economy to maximise its global competitiveness. One of those things you do is look at the impact of a two speed economy. You look at the impact of high levels of an Australian dollar and their impact on the export competitiveness of so many companies which are not in the resources sector.
One of those impacts we've already seen, and that is the impact for example of the international tourism market in Australia in the last 12 months. If you go to far north Queensland in Cairns, the unemployment rate in Cairns at the moment is 12.4 per cent. You go to any State Government in the country and ask for their tourism data, the international tourism numbers are down to billy-o. That's what's happening.
Ask those in the universities how their international student markets are going, it's not just the Indian students problem in Melbourne, because that's been largely geographically contained. What's actually happening is the dollar is punishing those providers hugely, and what is a substantial export earner for Australia, the international tourism market and the international student market has been punished by the dollar.
There are some in this room who still represent the art of manufacturing. I actually believe in manufacturing, we've actually come through with an auto industry virtually intact, not a bad achievement when you actually think what's happened elsewhere in the world through the crisis which has recently concluded. But you know something, our great, fantastic world beating manufacturers are also being punished by a high Australian dollar. It is affecting the aggregate competitiveness of the Australian economy.
So you ask therefore what therefore is the rationale of the tax reform. The company tax rate at present exists in the upper third of the OECD. Our challenge is to bring it down at least to the middle and to optimally take it lower. The Government's target is to bring it to 25, but you know something, money doesn't grow on trees, you've actually got to fund the company tax cut from somewhere. So how do you do that if you want your Australian firms outside the resources sector to remain globally competitive. You've got to fund it from somewhere.
We could fund it by jacking up a whole lot of taxes on consumers, on individual PAYE earners, you could do it that way. Or you could also look at those companies which benefit most from resources with are ultimately owned by the Australian people who from time to time, in the global commodity cycle, will enjoy great levels of profitability as a result of the resources which they sell to the rest of the world.
I fully get it and understand it having known the mining industry for the last 20 years coming from Queensland, how much risk and enterprise is involved in setting up a mine, and how much risk and enterprise (inaudible) lies in actually taking up a project such as that in offshore north west Australia in making it work. These are big things, I've been up there, I've seen how much capital is involved, how much risk is involved, it is large. But I'm also mindful of the fact that when you've got a global commodity boom, driven by the demand from economies like China, that it's time also to look at what the proceeds of that boom could do for broader tax reform in the Australian economy.
So what's our core proposal? One: that the resources sector onshore should have a profit based tax regime just as the offshore sector has had since Craig Emerson and others worked on the PRRT more than 20 years ago. Secondly, we've argued that a profit based regime is better than a production based regime because it goes up and down much more closely with fluctuations in the global commodities cycle, we think that's actually rational, in fact that was the submission to us also of the Mining Council of Australia.
Third, we've also said that as far as the proceeds of this are concerned, we would use it not to go into the budget bottom line at all, but we would use it to fund the company tax reform which your organisation has been calling out for, for a long period of time. We've said we'd bring company tax down to 28, our ambition lies to bring it down to 25. We've said also we'd bring about tax breaks for small business because those 2.4 million small businesses we believe should be given every encouragement to become the big business of the future.
The other thing we've said is that by virtue of those adjustments to company tax rates and tax breaks for small business, we'd make it more possible, aided by enterprise bargaining, to bring about the increase in the superannuation guarantee from 9 per cent to 12 per cent over time, progressively across the decade ahead.
Not only is that good for working families, who also need to have a decent nest egg to retire, decent superannuation adequacy, all 7.5 million of them, it boosts our national savings.
I'm always mindful of the great reform that Paul Keating brought in the 90s with compulsory superannuation in this country. The rest of the world stands in awe at the quantity of superannuation savings we have in this country, north of $1 trillion. What we do through these reforms is add something in the vicinity of at least another $100 billion to that, of taking the rate from 9 to 12.
I also note from our friends in the corporate community, that when credit markets froze during the course of 2008-09, the existence of onshore savings off the back of super were fundamental in a number of domestic capital raisings which occurred to the tune of some $70, $85, or even $95 billion. Creating a bigger buffer of national savings for the future in my argument is actually a very good thing to do. Lower company tax, tax breaks for small business and creating a greater pool of national savings. I regard that as pretty fundamental tax reform.
The argument which has just been put forward by others, that somehow the Government's approach to tax reform is incomplete, I believe is inconsistent with what we said when we commissioned the Henry review in the first place. What we said when we commissioned the Henry review was that we would have a possible blueprint from long term debate, discussion and a foundation for long term, comprehensive tax reform.
When the Treasurer released the Henry review on the 2nd May, he indicated the following: there was a range of proposals and recommendations in Henry which we would not contemplate in a month of Sundays. There was another range, from memory Wayne, 60 or 70 or maybe 70 or 80 which are on the table for future discussion in a future term of this Government - and then there was a range that we would actually act on in the immediate term. That's our approach. We actually think it's systematic, because there had been no systematic review of the totality of the tax system for at least 25 years or more.
That's the approach that we said we'd take, that's the approach we did take, and we've made clear the basis for the reform which we are now taking forth.
Now on the question of consultation which has just been raised concerning tax, and concerning the RSPT. As the Treasurer said on the day, on the 2nd of May, what we're up for is this. We want a tax on profits, we want for that tax to be 40 per cent, that's what applies currently in the PRRT, we wanted a tax which also applies to existing projects. We've also said that that tax should generate revenue to fund the type of policy reforms I've just mentioned.
We've also said that on the question of detail, implementation and generous transition arrangements, we would consult and negotiate with industry. With many, many companies in this country, we are doing precisely that and have been doing it for the last month or so. Many resulting in quite good conclusions.
A number of companies have chosen not to embrace that, for reasons best know to them. That of course is their right, it's a free country, so when it comes to us being prepared to consult and negotiate within the framework I've just referred to, I believe it's a very open invitation. You can have a door open for a while, it does however require a decision for others to walk through that door as well.
Tax reform we think is really important. Our proposal on an RSPT is there and the areas where we are prepared to negotiate against the framework of 2 May is there for all to see. As I said, through Martin, through Wayne and through others, those negotiations and consultations continue.
So that in a nutshell is our rationale for tax reform. That in a nutshell is the way in which we are seeking to undertake consultations with those in the corporate community and the mining community, who wish to undertake them. And that process is underway.
On the question of the public sound and light show, that of course is a matter for various parties to attend to. I will not seek to apportion publically, responsibility for that.
My interest as Prime Minister of the country is to get a good outcome for the nation. I have spent a fair bit of time over the years with the resources industry, I've spent a lot of time with the corporate community. I used to work with these guys KPMG, though they will now probably publically disown me given the reports they released in recent days. It's ok, hang in there (inaudible) It's a joke, alright?
And therefore the best outcome for the country is if we can negotiate our way through this, and find a good landing point. That's what we're up for. We're actually a Government that believes in that. But if there is some misty eyed view that if you went through a process of six months consultation before putting out the sort of framework I just referred to before, that our largest mining companies would whack their hand up and say yes, I really want to pay more tax, then I don't necessarily hold that view.
We're open to questions of negotiation, consultation on design. That's detail. On transition, on generous transition arrangements, that's what we mean, that's what we've said, that's what we're doing with many companies across the country.
A last word on the G20. Can I just say to all of you that we the Government still have some concerns about how the global economy is unfolding. We all follow the public debate, the public newspapers, but we're also examining what's happening in terms of threats on the supply of credit internationally and where that goes to in the future. We are in uncertain times. It's very important that I end this presentation to you on the question that I began with, which is it is fundamental for us all to maintain the stability of our financial system.
Absent the flow of credit and the availability of credit, then frankly, our economy is in deep trouble. Therefore we as a Government maintain a very clear weather eye on what will be necessary for the future in ensuring the continued stability of our system which underpins everything which we do.
Toronto will be engaged in that, a lot of it behind the scenes as we look carefully at bond market reactions to the recent developments in sovereign debt. There's a lot of jitteriness out there on the question of sovereign debt and we're going to have to work our way through that soberly, calmly, in a considered fashion as we did through the first phase of this global financial crisis, which I still hope was the last phase of this global financial crisis.
I thank you.



PM: Good morning or good afternoon. Thank you for your attendance. Yesterday as you know was a busy day.
We had the swearing in at Government House of myself, the Deputy Prime Minister and the Treasurer.
Of course, we also had Parliament.
Last night, I met extensively with my colleagues, the Deputy Prime Minister, the Leader of the Government in the Senate, the Deputy Leader in the Senate, as well as the Treasurer Chris Bowen.
We've been discussing at some length the composition of the ministry of this government and those discussions of course have continued this morning.
The new executive will be sworn in next Monday here in Canberra subject of course to Her Excellency's availability.
This morning I've also spent a lot of time with the Secretary of the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet being briefed on current budget priorities, economic priorities, other policy priorities, and national security matters.
This afternoon there will be a full briefing by the range of government officials beyond PM&amp;C here in the Cabinet room, together with a briefing on national security by the full range of officials as well.
So we've had a few things on as you would understand.
Today what I would like to do is share with you the discussion I had with my caucus colleagues about 36 hours ago about why I have elected to return to the Prime Ministership of Australia.
I believe that this is important and it's important that the nation is fully aware of why this change has occurred.
Secondly, I also want to today share with you my overall approach to policy decision-making by the government. Finally I want to talk about the future of the national school improvement plan – better schools, better futures for our kids.
On the first matter, there are three reasons I sought to return to the leadership of this party.
It is rare a person is given a second opportunity to lead one of the major political parties of Australia.
Mr Howard was extended that opportunity.
I've been extended that opportunity.
I regard it as a singular honour for that to have happened.
First reason for my decision was that the government was on track for a catastrophic defeat at the upcoming election.
Not just a massive majority from Mr Abbott in the Lower House but also a massive majority in the Senate as well or at least a significant one.
Were that to occur then we would effectively have seen torn down so many of the reforms that this government, both under my Prime Ministership and Julia Gillard's Prime Ministership, we would have seen them simply disappear.
Whether we're talking about the National Broadband Network; whether we're talking about trade training centres; whether we are talking about Medicare locals; whether we're talking about proper investment in our schools; whether we're talking about investment in basic things like urban rail projects.
All these would simply be torn down were we to suffer such a catastrophic defeat.
Had we lost in the Senate as well, who knows what would happen and what would've happened in terms of the future of the Fair Work Act, which affects penalty rates and working conditions and overtime for so many of Australians.
Some of these reforms, good reforms, have been Julia's and I pay appropriate tribute to her work on the national school improvement program and her work on the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
Some of these reforms of course date back to the period when I was Prime Minister after 2007.
Some of these reforms were the joint work of both of us.
My attitude was simply this: I could not stand idly by and allow all these good changes which have benefitted millions of Australians to simply be thrown away in the event that we suffered such a catastrophic defeat at the election.
Hence it was time to put up my hand.
The second reason is the mood I picked up across the Australian people over a long period of time is whatever their politics, they want this election to at least provide them with the opportunity for a real choice.
Many were saying to me and to my colleagues that they didn't feel as if they had a real choice.
That they were being forced to choose Mr Abbott when they didn't really want to.
I believe that my return to the leadership of the Australian Labor Party and as Prime Minister of Australia provides the Australian people with that choice.
A real policy choice for the next election and for Australia's future.
The third reason is that I want to make some policy changes.
Those policy changes will be considered in due course by the Cabinet once it's sworn in and over a period of time, these will be of course made public to you, the Australian media, and through you to the Australian people.
These have been hard times in any political party.
At various times in history, all parties have gone through such times.
Then those parties come through.
We intend to come through as well.
What I have said privately is what I have said publicly – any member of the ministry under Prime Minister Gillard who wishes to continue to work under my Prime Ministership will be welcome to do so.
I'm pleased and gratified that so many have chosen to do so.
My business is to harvest all the talents that are available for the good of the Australian people and for the good governance of Australia.
I also said I'd talk briefly about my approach to government decision making.
The Cabinet as I said will be sworn in next Monday.
Those of you good ladies and gentlemen of the press which expect an avalanche of policy decisions between now and next Monday, just chill for a while.
In fact, chill for quite a bit.
Because this will be done through the proper orderly processes of Cabinet decision making.
Everyone knows the budgetary environment which the governments faces and the nation faces.
Each of these decisions therefore will be properly considered through the normal machinery of government.
If I have learnt one thing from my previous period as Prime Minister and I've learned quite a lot from my previous period as Prime Minister, one of the things I have learnt is the absolute importance of proper orderly consultation with Cabinet colleagues on any major decision of the government.
We can all say it's too busy, there's a global financial crisis going on, sorry colleagues, don't have time, we've got to save the banks from falling.
These all seem pretty good justifications at the time but frankly decision making is always much better when it can be done collegiately.
I'd also like to mention before I take questions from you the government's approach to the national school improvement plan.
I've spent a lot of time with my colleagues the Deputy Prime Minister and Treasurer, Senator Penny Wong and Senator Jacinta Collins on a discussion last night and this morning on future of the national school improvement plan.
This up until now has gone by the name of Gonski.
I know David Gonski.
In fact, full disclosure, he's Chairman of my wife's board of her company.
So before any of you start writing the exposes, there you have it from the horse's mouth.
Mind you when this was first put forward when I was still Minister for Foreign Affairs in the previous Cabinet I did declare that conflict of interest.
The bottom line is I don't think David wants his reforms referred to as the Gonski reform.
I think when I last spoke with him, he finds that a bit too confusing.
I ran into someone recently in my electorate in Brisbane who said they're all for the Gonski reforms because their kids have been educated in a Steiner school and Gonski was kind of like Steiner and there you go.
I said well not quite.
So I think we have a slightly different challenge which is to take the absolute with substance of a plan for national school improvement and to describe what it actually does for Australian teachers, for Australian students, for Australian kids and for their schools physically as well.
This national school improvement program is about better schools and better futures for our kids.
It is a program which looks specifically at what we do to lift teacher standards, by bringing about a new standard for teacher education before they qualify as teachers in the first place.
That's important.
It's also about improving the quality of what is taught in schools.
For example, under this plan, science will be introduced as a testable item under the existing national testing program which at present applies to only literacy and numeracy.
That will be introduced under this national school improvement program.
In other areas, we go to the importance of greater autonomy for school principals, so that there is a much greater power to hire and fire and to use the resources available to the school with discretion, by the principal as they see fit.
On top of that, you also have greater transparency.
Every school under this will be required to develop a school improvement plan, which is to take your school from here to here in terms of the quality of its education outcomes for the kids, and also for how the resources of the school will be developed over time as well; and for that to be transparent to the parent community as well as to the wider public.
Finally, this is a reform which seeks to also provide reliable long term funding on the basis of needs-based funding for future.
Whether those schools are government schools or non-government schools, state schools or Catholic schools.
So therefore, for these reasons, in consultation with my colleagues this morning, but also given that there are certain time lines which are bearing down on us from various of the states and territories; the decision that I am announcing today is that under my Prime Ministership and under this government, we will support the national improvement plan for Australian schools, better schools, better futures for our kids.
Secondly in relation to the consultation deadline, which currently expires with the jurisdictions on this, expires I think on 30 June, we'll extend that by two weeks.
I look forward to the opportunity of sitting down myself with premiers and chief ministers from states which have not signed on.
I look forward to my discussion when I return to the people's republic of Queensland to speak with the premier thereof.
I'm sure I'll get a warm reception.
All we Queenslanders bond closely particularly after a State of Origin win.
On top of that I look forward to seeing Premier Napthine.
I look further discussions also with the Chief Minister of the Northern Territory and also the premier of Tasmania.
What is really important here as well is the Catholic scheme where much progress has been made in negotiations, not yet quite concluded and the independent schools where frankly, there is still a gap between their position and those held by the government.
This is an important item of reform.
It's a major item of reform.
I pay tribute to my predecessor for the work she and Minister Garrett have done on it and because of the urgency of decisions, and timing surrounding decisions, that is why I have made it clear today that under my Prime Ministership, this policy direction will continue.
I am concerned about making sure we have proper certainty for future funding.
That we have also the parallel guarantee of the improvement of the education outcomes of Australian schools and for their kids.
Finally, the government’s about bringing the country together, not dividing it.
I know my political opponent is pretty good at that sort of thing.
I think it's time we all came together.
I look forward to spending some time with the business community pretty soon.
I look forward to spending some time with the leader of the trade union movement pretty soon.
I look forward to actually having a civilised policy discussion, even if in private with the Leader of the Opposition on some of the big challenges facing the country's future.
I look forward very much to an open public debate with Mr Abbott at the National Press Club, in the next week or so, on the question, to start off with, of debt and deficit.
I've heard a million questions in there.
Let's have it fully and out in the open at the National Press Club.
You folks at the National Press Club, you set out the rules. I'm relaxed.
Sometime next week, sometime the following week but let's actually have a debate about the facts.
Over to you for questions.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how are you going to unite your party after such bitter in-fighting over the past few months and how do you clearly differentiate yourself in policy from the former Prime Minister?
PM: Well the first point is that as I said before, governments go through and political parties go through periods of internal debates.
It’s not unique to the Labor Party, it's happened before with the conservatives, it's happened before with us and then people bind together.
Secondly, it's important to heal the wounds by making a very simple statement, that those, whatever their views of me in the past, who wish to serve in the ministry in the future will be welcome to do so.
I've had many, many constructive conversations, positive conversations with a whole bunch of ministers who wish to continue.
As for the question of future policy directions I go back to my earlier comments about the orderly nature of Cabinet decision-making.
I will say this, however, it's really important that we bring the country together.
I really do not support the politics of division, whether it's on the basis of class or anything else.
I actually believe we are much better as a nation working together.
Therefore, I'm saying that under my leadership, there is a hand outstretched firmly to business, to work with us, as it is also with the unions and I intend to have those meetings very soon.
JOURNALIST: One of the policy issues you've had trouble with last time and I don't think you mentioned so far today is asylum seekers and boats.
Will you be going to Indonesia to see the Indonesian President to discuss it?
And what philosophical position will you have in dealing with the boats?
Will you be trying to for example, will you be saying you're going to stop the boats or will you be trying to manage them or encourage people to come in a more orderly way under regional processing?
PM: The great thing about this country is we have long believed in a system of orderly migration.
The problem with the current situation is that I really fear that we begin to see some fragmentation for the overall national support for a system of orderly migration in Australia.
That has stood us so well since the days of Arthur Calwell way back in the post-war period.
We actually have to be very attentive to a basic national interest, which is to sustain broad public support for a system of orderly migration.
Secondly, on the question of Indonesia, I will be briefed this afternoon by colleagues who've been working on the proposed visit to Indonesia and following that briefing, of course, I will announce a decision about going to Jakarta.
I will be speaking with President Yudhoyono sometime after I finish with you good folk here this afternoon in Canberra.
I would also if I went to went to Indonesia be speaking frankly on the much broader questions of our common national security interests.
On top of that, a really big one, which is I am concerned about Mr Abbott's policy where he says that he can turn the boats back to Indonesia as he states, and when he states now more recently, only when safe; and when the Indonesian Government says they will not accept such a policy.
I'm very concerned about whether if Mr Abbott were to become Prime Minister and continues that rhetoric and that posture and actually tries to translate it into reality, I really wonder whether he's trying to risk some sort of conflict with Indonesia.
It's not a good thing.
It's a really bad thing.
Let me tell you, if you are a student of the Australia/Indonesia relationship which I have been since the days of the late forties until now, there've been some pretty tough times in the relationship.
I never want to see that happen again.
A quarter of a billion people live to the north of us.
We have a huge national interest in having a working relationship with them.
On the question of the attitude I bring to bear on asylum seekers, it will be in the national interest, mindful of the need to sustain popular support for the overall integrity of the migration program.
JOURNALIST: Do you accept Wayne Swan's budget parameters as they exist now, as in the 2013-14 budget, or is everything on the table and my second question is: have you had any thoughts about one of the controversial policies which is moving single mums onto the lesser Newstart payment?
PM: I've had a lot of thoughts about many things. That's one of them.
But these are deliberations for the Cabinet.
As I said, that will occur next week.
Secondly on the question of budget parameters, there will be a discussion about that this afternoon.
I'd rather not, frankly, make any broad sweeping statement about budget parameters, prior to receiving proper briefings by PM&amp;C and Treasury as to where things stand.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, can I go to what commitment you might have to party reform because it is a matter of interest for a number of your senior supporters.
There's going to be preselections now in Rankin, Perth, Kingsford Smith, all the plum Labor seats.
Will you be insisting on local plebiscites?
Will you be opposing the parachuting in by the party organisation?
PM: I thank you for raising the question.
Party reform as you've studied a few of my previous statements on this is near and dear to my heart for a range of reasons.
One of which is also near and dear to my heart and that is how we conduct ourselves in an orderly fashion in the future on questions of the leadership of our parliamentary party.
I will speak to that at some length later on.
On the broader question of party reform, can I say this: I am revolted by what I have seen unfold in New South Wales.
I am revolted by what I have seen unfold through the ICAC inquiry.
I am revolted that this could've been seen to have been acceptable practice.
I will therefore be having a very deep discussion with cabinet colleagues of an entirely political nature about the new direction for New South Wales and more broadly, where we go on the overall remit of party reform nationwide.
You asked, Malcolm, specifically about local preselections.
The overwhelming preference is there will to be local democratic ballots.
The only exception I see to that is if you have a genuine crisis of time.
In the seats you've just mentioned I'm not sure that such a crisis exists. I really am not.
By the way I'm pleased you've referred to the seat of Rankin as a plum seat.
I don't think Craig would regard it as that nor any of us from the Queensland branch just right now.
JOURNALIST: The third for taking back the leadership was changes you want to make.
It was widely telegraphed when you challenged last year that you wanted to move the carbon price quickly [inaudible] floating price. Bearing in mind what you said about processes needing to respected, is that something that you’re going to be looking at [inaudible]?
PM: That's a great question. It's all about the carbon price.
I will be speaking with my Cabinet colleagues on that.
Yes, I didn't telegraph it before in times past.
I actually said it and I own that.
Don't walk away from anything I've said.
It's a silly thing to try to do for anyone in public life.
I'm also very mindful of due process.
I want to discuss this fully with the Cabinet including the budget implications which flow from any such decision and the timing of any such decision.
That I think is the right way to go.
JOURNALIST: Just following up on [inaudible] you indicated one of the reasons for your return is some policy changes without giving us the detail on what they are.
Can you tell us the areas broadly that you do want to see policy changes and carbon being one of them and the timing here, this could take some time.
Will you cover off all the policy changes before going into campaign mode?
PM: Look, I can't on the one hand say we believe in orderly Cabinet-based decision making and then 12 minutes later say ‘okay mate, let's make an exception, I’ll just tell you what I’m about to do tomorrow.’
It’s not like that.
Business of government is not like that and there is sufficient time for us to work through some of the big policy challenges we face in an orderly fashion.
I intend to do that.
As for your other question about what happens during our period of government as opposed to when we go into caretaker mode, look I would hope to get major policy settings right before we enter caretaker mode.
But as you always know electoral contests are often about a few new ideas as well.
So I would emphasise the importance of sticking to orderly decision-making processes.
JOURNALIST: Back on border protection for a tick.
PM: I'm surprised by that Andrew!
JOURNALIST: I know, sorry about that. But Bob Carr in recent days has been talking about how the area has been controlled by people smugglers and been talking about economic migrants. Is this the sort of rhetoric that you embrace?
And secondly do you rule out recalling parliament to get some potential changes to legislation through?
PM: On the question of the parliamentary schedule, that of course has not been discussed with Cabinet colleagues, least of all with the Deputy Prime Minister, Anthony Albanese, and Leader of the Government in the House.
So whoa behold anyone who makes such an announcement in the absence of talking to Albo.
So let’s just put all of that to one side.
You’ve referred I think to Bob Carr’s recent language and his specific reference to economic migrants?
Look, let’s just face some facts here. A whole budge of people who seek to come to this country are economic migrants who are seeking to comport themselves as refugees.
That's why we have seek a decision-making process, and some are genuine refugees.
And the Wisdom of Solomon lies with those in our national immigration service and our Refugee Review Tribunal to sort out one from the other. It's a hard business.
But you would have to be deluding yourself if you thought that there weren't a l bunch of people seeking to come to this country for purely economic reasons.
Our challenge is to minimise that number and to ensure that we still maintain our commitments under the refugee convention.
JOURNALIST: You spoke, I think on Wednesday night – it’s a bit of a blur – about not leaving the bush behind, about regionalism. Can you give us any ideas about why you mentioned that? What you’re looking at there?
You also spoke about manufacturing in similar terms as when you first took the leadership. Do you think there needs to be any policy shift, or changes more generally?
PM: Look, I’m just kind of telling it like it is. I’m a kid who grew up in the country and I’ve never left that behind me.
So when I talk about nation building, I think of rural areas. I think of farms, I think of animals, I think of horses, I think of little communities of 200 people, I think of larger towns of 10,000 like the big smoke I went to secondary school in in Nambour.
I will come back in a minute by the way to give you an example of under the better schools plan what Nambour State High School – I’m advised – would receive by way of an additional allocation under the proposed national schooling improvement plan.
The advice I had was that over six years, Nambour State High School would be something like $10.8 million dollars better off.
Now having been through that school – and I don't think Nambour ever having been a seat ever owned by the Australian Labor Party, maybe back in Andrew Fisher's day I'm not quite sure – I feel pretty passionately about those kids having needs-based funding and the best opportunities for the future of any other kid in the country.
That's where I come from.
You spoke about manufacturing. Well we didn't do a lot of manufacturing in Nambour. There was a welding works but I think it shut sometime in the 60s.
It is absolutely critical for our economic future that there is a viable manufacturing industry in this country. It is not an old industry. It is a new industry.
It is being reformed because of the innovations and materials research, new materials research and the innovations which are now occurring in the forms of new copying technologies.
This therefore creates us with a whole bunch of new opportunities to regenerate cities for example like Geelong and elsewhere.
And can I say one further point on the broader question of the economy?
When I look at the challenges of rest of this year, and certainly for the upcoming three-year term, the huge outstanding economic challenge for us is the end of the China resources boom.
This will have a dramatic effect on our terms of trade, a dramatic effect on living standards in the country, a dramatic effect also potentially on unemployment unless we have an effective counter-strategy.
What Government has been seeking to do is of course to boost national productivity, and there are encouraging figures in terms of labour productivity, but across the board we have to do a whole lot more as well.
And with the benefit of a lower dollar, assist and work with industry in diversifying the Australian economy.
Remember I got ridiculed so much in time’s past by Peter Costello and others when I used to stand up and say ‘what are you going to do Mr Costello, Mr Howard, once the mining boom is over?’
I had abuse hurled at me because this was an unpatriotic statement back in 2007.
I’ve got to say it's happened, and the whole reason for the productivity reforms that we've brought in through infrastructure, through education, et cetera has been to gear the whole economy to deal with these new challenges of the future.
And a lower dollar begins to put our agricultural industries, our manufacturing industries, and our service exports into a better space to create the new jobs which may come off in our resources sector.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, can I just take you back to some of the language about what would happen if Tony Abbott turned back the boats to Indonesia. You used the term ‘risking conflict with Indonesia’, and asked us to consider the history. Are you talking about the possibility that that policy would raise armed conflict with Indonesia? Or do you want us to think about [inaudible]?
PM: No, no, I'm talking about diplomatic conflict. But I'm always wary about where diplomatic conflicts go.
Confrontation with Indonesia evolved over a set of words, and turned into something else.
Let's call it for what it is.
If the Ambassador of the Republic of Indonesia in Australia says that the policy of the Government of Indonesia is not one which would faintly support the policy put forward by Mr Abbott, and secondly if Mr Abbott as Prime Minister then seeks to do that, you end up with a pretty robust diplomatic conflict and I become a little uncertain as to where that heads.
And I have had enough experience in international relations, as a serving diplomat, as Foreign Minister, and as Prime Minister to know one thing: you really need to have some pretty cool hands on the tiller when you're dealing with the Indonesia relationship.
JOURNALIST: Is there an armed conflict risk between Australia and Indonesia troops.
PM: I just said there is a risk of diplomatic conflict and if you're mindful of the history, you have got to be mindful of where conflict leads you.
I for one, as Prime Minister of Australia, will do everything within my power to continue to improve the relationship with Indonesia, rather than to put it at risk.
I'm not suggesting that Mr Abbott would intentionally head in that direction at all.
But I'm saying very clearly that you have a policy collision here between what he says and what the Government of Indonesia says.
Mr Abbott has said he has already started writing his victory speech as Prime Minister. This is not a hypothetical thing.
He's been well ahead in opinion polls for a very long period of time. Therefore, we've got to ask this question. What happens on Day 1 when field marshal Tony puts out the order to the captain of the Australian naval frigate X to turn back a bunch of boats?
And you've got naval frigate from the Indonesian navy on the other side of the equation.
I think that there's sufficient maturity in this country and I hope certainly on the part of our friends and colleagues in Indonesia to avoid such a contingency.
I'm simply putting a spotlight on a direct policy conflict. Mr Abbott seeks to take personal political capital out of his three-word slogan.
It has huge foreign policy consequences. All I’m saying is, that's a diplomatic conflict, if it goes anywhere else – I certainly hope it doesn’t – I don’t believe it would. I hope it wouldn’t.
But I just think it's time to be honest about all this.
JOURNALIST: To call it what it is in your terms, isn't the solution to stop the boats leaving Indonesia in the first place?
And don’t you need to have a robust discussion with them about that?
That wasn't going to be my question, but anyway.
All of your predecessors as Prime Minister, including rather bizarrely yourself, have had press conferences like this in which they promise to have an open-door policy, to consult widely, to release policy in an orderly fashion and then have shut the door, talked to themselves and thrown things out like sausages.
Not being unkind that was a criticism of your prime ministership in the end.
What undertakings specifically have you given to your team that you won't be like the original Kevin?
PM: Well what I’ve said to the Cabinet colleagues that I've been just referring to this morning; Deputy Prime Minister, the Treasurer, and the leader of the Government in the Senate, Deputy Leader in the Senate and to some other colleagues, is that anything major goes through the Cabinet.
There are from time to time genuine national security crises. Some of us do get telephone calls in the middle of the night.
I remember having to on the spur of the moment ring President George Bush and ask specifically, from an Australian national interest point of view, would he take actions necessary to support and to save a very large insurance company in the United States because it had huge re-insurance implications across the Australian insurance industry.
Did I sit down and have a Cabinet meeting about that? Nope. So I'm just saying that's the caveat. Stuff happens and you've sometimes got to act on it quickly. You've got to use your judgment.
But on anything major, which is a major structural policy shift, a major policy shift which affects large constituencies in the country, I believe it's really important to put it through the cabinet and that's what I will be doing.
JOURNALIST: On the issue of education, you’ve changed, you’ve announced name change and a deadline change.
Are we expecting to see more money offered?
And on the issue of party reform and being revolted, are you reopening the pre-selection in the Northern Territory for the Senate given your good friendship with Trish Crossin?
PM: The first point is about – let me just answer the question on party reform.
On party reform, it's near and dear to my heart.
I've said on the public record the principles which I apply to it.
I've been pretty upfront about it.
I’ve got some other thoughts on it as well and I think the challenge we have in New South Wales is here, present and immediate.
That stuff you see before ICAC doesn't seem to just fall out of nowhere and therefore you've got to act on it.
On the question of party preselections, I will take advice from colleagues as the best way forward. I have not turned my mind to any specific preselection anywhere for the simple reason, as I outlined at the beginning of this, there has been a fair bit on. Lane…
JOURNALIST: (inaudible)
PM: Can I just go to Lane please?
JOURNALIST: You said Mr Rudd this morning (inaudible) and have you asked any of those who've indicated that they want to stay on?
PM: On the question of the swearing in, it will be either announced on the day or before.
It depends a bit when frankly it's all ready and done.
A little practical thing is this: get your administrative arrangements right.
Orderly decision making means that when you are assigning ministers to portfolios that the precise administrative arrangements are dealt with.
That takes a fair bit of time.
For my sins I was once a Cabinet Secretary in the Queensland Government.
I'm sure I got it wrong a few times. In fact you were up there at the time, Lane.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, just to take you back to preselections, obviously under your predecessor there's been a lot of talk about gender politics, including gender politics within the ALP.
What is your attitude to getting women into some of the now quite a few seats that are coming up, and have you given any thought to Batman?
I take your point about not giving thought to preselection individually and in general but that's been very high profile.
Do you have an opinion on that?
PM: A strong high profile role for women in Australia's national political life is absolutely essential.
You heard me say that when I was first elected as Prime Minister.
You've seen me do that when I went to that election in 2007 with Australia's first woman as Deputy Prime Minister, Julia Gillard.
I think you saw that also when I recommended to the Queen the appointment of the first woman as Australia's Governor-General.
And I believe that we have had a strong, very strong team of women ministers in the Australian Government and there will still be a very strong team of women ministers in the next Cabinet as well.
On top of that, in terms of getting more and more women into the Australian Parliament, that is my aspiration as well.
I want women to have every, every opportunity.
I support their full participation in our national political life and consistent with the local preselection processes.
I would be urging people to take consideration of women who may stick their hand up.
I notice some recently had their hand up then pulled it down, in the case of Jed Carney.
But frankly, I think our national political life is much better served by the fact that what I have discovered in my own family with a fairly strong wife, a fairly strong daughter and a very robust lunged granddaughter, is that we actually see things through slightly different eyes these two genders of ours and it's important that we have all that round the Cabinet table and in our parliamentary debate as well.
JOURNALIST: Congratulations on your big increase in your Chinese followers.
PM: Sorry, I have no idea where you're from. I’m just running across the line.
JOURNALIST: Julia Gillard mentioned just in this room about her (inaudible) about her visit to China in April (inaudible) Are you satisfied with the current relations between the two countries and are we going to see some policy changes in this respect?
PM: I think the relationship with China is in very good working order.
Everyone knows that we have massive economic interests which we have in common.
We also know that on many, many foreign policy questions we have an identical or common view and from time to time we have the odd difference on questions such as human rights.
Kind of as it's been for a long period of time.
The state of the relationship is good.
What I'd really like to see and this has been a tough, tough process and I would say to our friends in Beijing, let us conclude the free trade agreement between China and Australia.
This thing has been moving across the Sahara at the pace of a slightly lame camel.
It really needs to be brought to conclusion.
That's no criticism of any Trade Minister who's held a portfolio but it's been very difficult.
If I could say this to our friends in China who are often concerned about the impact of Australian agriculture on their own domestic agricultural industry.
If Australia exported all of its agricultural exports to China it may cater for the extra food demands of Guangdong province, maybe, on a good day.
We will not by simply the size of the agricultural output that we have, create so much as a minor disruption in the Chinese agricultural industry and I think in terms of Chinese consumers' demands, for an increasing range of food products, and of our appropriate environmental accreditation, that there is a huge opportunity for us as Australians to huge opportunity Australians to do much better in Australians in the Chinese agricultural Australians and I'm sure in the Chinese market.
I'm sure the Chinese will have some further requests of us as well.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, you're extending the deadline on the school funding reforms but are you offering any flexibility on the structure those reforms.
Would you offer any flexibility on how much the States contribute or how much Canberra contributes to that deal?
PM: Well David, I'm just a reasonable guy.
So you walk in the door, you shake someone's hand and say OK this for the nation's good, what can we do about it.
I also would pay tribute to Barry O'Farrell who's copped it neck from his Liberal parliamentary colleagues here in Canberra for actually taking a decision based on the future needs of the kids in New South Wales and I’d actually appeal to all the Premiers and Chief Ministers to kind of just look above the parapets here and look to how it will unfold for the next decade.
So on the question of the fundamentals of the Commonwealth position, it will not change.
But I'm a reasonable guy.
I will have a chat and if there's an argument I will either shoot it down in flames or say well let's have a think about this.
But can I say, the parameters for variation are very, very narrow, very, very narrow.
Not least because the good folk of NSW and a few other States have already signed up.
JOURNALIST: Some of you colleagues believe that leaked against, stalked and tore down Australia's first female Prime Minister. Can I ask you to respond to those concerns? Secondly, will you be acting on your new-found opinion on gay marriage?
PM: On the first question, the answer is that those accusations are completely untrue.
On the second, as you know, through some would describe as my tortuous essay on my change in position on marriage equality, I didn't arrive at that position lightly.
It was a journey. I arrived at that position and I actually would stay to Mr Abbott right here and now.
Whoever wins the next election, please let's just have the civility to open this to a conscience vote for all.
I've indicated publicly where I will go on this.
If he doesn't, then I think we then have to look at other mechanisms, including the possibility of recourses to plebiscite or referendum, including the possibility.
But I would much prefer to have this thing just resolved.
My position is out there. The position of so many other members and senior ministers is out there.
I think I'm now the first Prime Minister of Australia who is a full signed-up supporter of marriage equality.
I don't think anyone else was. I would like to see this and the reason I want to see it done is, frankly, because it causes so many people such unnecessary angst out in Australia, in the gay and lesbian community.
It just shouldn't be the case.
JOURNALIST: You have policy decisions to make that have budgetary implications.
What would you, without getting into the detail of any of those, what will be the attitude you bring to that?
Will you bring the fiscal conservative?
Will you bring the fiscal stimulator?
What is your attitude towards the budget and if I may your predecessor when she came in said she would not move into The Lodge until she'd been confirmed at an election.
What is your attitude towards moving into The Lodge?
PM: On the question of the economy and the approach I bring to bear, if I was to sum it up in two simple terms, it is economic responsibility.
By which I mean this look carefully right now in 2013 at what has happened to the British economy, because the British conservative government, it's entitled to do this, decided to implement a full blown austerity package in the midst of very troubled global economic circumstances and even worse in Europe.
They plunged the British economy back into recession and have come within a hair's breadth of a triple dip recession.
If Mr Abbott adopts that approach, as he has said and his economic spokesmen have said they will, let me say this very bluntly: he will tip Australia into recession and bring about significant unemployment.
What I know from economic history in this country is that once you've done that, it takes so long to get people back into employment and sometimes you end up with a lost generation or a lost half generation.
So my attitude is this: if everything was normal right in the global economic cycle right now, then of course, you would bring the budget back to surplus immediately.
But guess what it’s not. I have consistently said throughout my public policy career, that we will balance the budget consistent with the economic cycle, is to cater for contingencies such as we have at present.
So therefore, I bring to bear an attitude of economic responsibility.
It is economically irresponsible to undertake a massive austerity drive based on slash and burn which would tip the economy into recession and practically every mainstream economist in Australia agrees with that.
I'm looking at Fiona, the Director of Communications.
Hang on, hey folks, I will come back to that.
If I keep on talking here, half of you will right that he just went on and on and on and I could go now and the other half would say he didn't answer my question.
So what do you want me to do?
OK, I will stay for about another five minutes or so and let's go to this question.
On the question of The Lodge I really haven't turned my mind to that at all but at the appropriate time and certainly when Julia has vacated the premises, then when I'm in Canberra I will use The Lodge.
That's what the Prime Minister of Australia does.
But I will be spending a fair bit of time in Brisbane.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, do you plan to repair the mining tax before the election?
PM: What I'd like to be briefed on when we get to a budget briefing soon is the revenue projections from the mining tax.
And again I won't go into the business of policy speculation.
But I just want to be briefed on what are the revenue projections at present?
And how the tax is being implemented.
I think that’s the responsible course of action.
I don't foreshadow anything dramatic.
JOURNALIST: Two questions, on your question about your economic responsibility and being a fiscal conservative, would you basically look - if you are making any policy changes to make sure that they are revenue neutral and offset in savings.
Second the government announced in the budget that it would be reviewing the whole question of refugee humanitarian status.
Have you been briefed yet on where that review is up to and would you anticipate you will have an answer that you could take to Indonesia if you go?
PM: On the first question about offsets that's generally been my conservative approach.
I await however the briefing.
Which is about to occur so I simply add the caveat I have not yet been briefed by Treasury officials but that's been my general approach in terms of offsetting new expenditure initiatives.
On the second point I've been briefed this morning on the progress of the review.
G'day Bill, how are you? Senator Bill Heffernan, good to have you here.
On the other question, could I say this: the secretary PM&amp;C has briefed me on where that's up to.
There's still a lot of work to be done and the precise conclusion of it I just don't know.
JOURNALIST: Business has been scathing about the previous government's Fair Work legislation which went through the Senate last night and the 457 legislation which will go through we think at about 3pm today.
Will you commit to further consultation with the business community around these two pieces of key legislation as part of your promise to work more closely with business.
PM: Well it seems to be your question which is suggesting the conditionality’s of what constitutes a good working relationship with business.
If I was to define a good working relationship with business with ticking the box of everything that business community asks for, let me tell you the Commonwealth would've been bankrupt about 10 years ago.
Secondly, I have had an initial look at the provisions of the legislation you just referred to.
Particularly the local testing for employment purposes by firms who then seek to make recourse to 457s.
As far as those local testing are arrangements are concerned, on the face of it, they seem to be fine to me. Once this legislation is passed, I will be very attentive to any real cases put to me by the business community as to whether that's created a real operational problem as opposed to something which is rhetorical.
Remember this: we run one of the most open labour markets in the world.
We have a system of very large migration to this country, including people on all sorts of skills classes, as well as the use of 457s which you know has grown very considerably in recent times under us.
There is no government which has stronger credentials in saying it's a global labour market and therefore - my wife is Chairman of a global company and she understands these things.
She's dealing with different labour market jurisdictions all the time and how you move people from one jurisdiction to the other.
But I don't think it's too much of an ask to simply say if you want to employ somebody, can you stick an ad in the paper and then have a look to see whether the local talent pool can be sufficient to it?
JOURNALIST: I want to ask you about your rallying cry for young Australians to get involved so you can cook with gas?
Are you looking at policies particularly for young people or do you think the personality of Kevin is enough to engage young people?
PM: No, the personality of Kevin would turn a whole bunch of people off, quite frankly. (laughter) Don't laugh so quickly!
The bottom line is this: a lot of young people including my own daughter, Jess, have spoken to me long and hard for example on marriage equality and wherever I go in Australia it just hits you in the face what young people think about this which is that our current arrangements are just wrong.
So frankly my position on that is clear.
Mr Abbott's position on that is clear.
I've announced the reasons for the change in my position.
But can I just add one other thing?
In terms of cooking with gas, which Jessica told me last night was one of the daggiest things she had ever heard me say - none of you are daggy dads? Anyway.
The use of broadband with decent bandwidth by younger Australians is taken for granted.
I've spoken to a whole bunch of foreign student who is come to Brisbane to study, from China for example, and they say what is it with your local broadband speeds?
These things are just not up to world standards.
Frankly, the digital generation know this. Older folks tend not to.
So I’ve got to say marriage equality, decent world-class broadband, these are two big selling points to young Australians all of whom are fully wired for sound.
Now folks I have really got to … one for Karen then I will go.
JOURNALIST: Three years ago when this job was taken from you, your successor said that a good government had lost its way.
I’m wondering what was it about her government that led them to the catastrophic state you have described?
How much was it the matter of her elevation and how much of it was something else? What was it?
PM: Karen, I don't think there's anything to be served by going into any of those things in the public domain.
I've said this to my colleagues and very mindful of personal experience back in 2010, is that I will not tolerate anyone going out there and trashing Julia's reputation.
Let me tell you, I have a bit of experience of that, it's not pleasant and it's not right.
Frankly, I don't think the Australian people like it either.
So history will be the judge of all these things.
I'm pretty relaxed where people will reach their judgments over time as to the decisions that have been taken.
But in terms of just dealing with a human being and having been in this situation myself, I believe Julia Gillard should be treated with appropriate respect and dignity as a former Prime Minister of Australia. Thank you very much.
[ENDS]


Canberra
The Prime Minister will visit Jakarta and Bogor Indonesia, from 4 to 5 July at the invitation of President Yudhoyono to attend the annual Indonesia-Australia Leaders’ Meeting.
Indonesia is a close friend and neighbour and one of Australia’s most important bilateral partners. Our countries enjoy a close and dynamic relationship based on mutual respect, shared democratic values, and a common interest in building a stable and prosperous region.
Our bilateral relationship is one of Australia’s most broad-based, spanning business, education, defence, security and people-to-people links. 
Indonesia is an important commercial partner for Australia, with two-way trade valued at $14.6 billion and Australian investment in Indonesia valued at $6.8 billion in 2012. 
Our countries work together regionally and globally, including as fellow members of APEC, which Indonesia is chairing this year, and the G20, which Australia will chair in 2014.  We also cooperate closely in the East Asia Summit.


Subject(s): Macquarie candidate Susan Templeman; Government investment in Blue Mountains; Trades training centres; Election date; Asylum seekers; Relations with Indonesia 
PM: It’s great to be back in the Blue Mountains with our terrific local candidate Susan Templeman.
Susan Templeman is a first-class local candidate, and I've been up here with her before – how long ago was that?
TEMPLEMAN: October last year.
PM: October last year, and neither of us has aged a bit since then.
TEMPLEMAN: Not at all!
PM: But she is extraordinary, 22 years a local, dedicated to this community, and it’s a community to which the Australian Labor government has delivered a lot.
I've just been through some of the things that we've done here. In the schools of this area, 35 primary schools I think in the federal electorate of Macquarie, and we have injected more than $55 million into new libraries, new multipurpose facilities, new classrooms and the rest.
Then when you look at TAFE and trades, and I saw a guy before, he’s an electrician, they're always looking for people coming through. We have built in this area four new trades training centres.
And this is terrific, servicing – the Penrith Valley trades training, McCarthy College trade training, and when I was up here last time, I went up to St Columba’s School and met some of the kids who are using some of those facilities.
But on top of that there’s a whole bunch of folk up here who are now making use of more university places.
Did you know this? Since we were elected five or six years ago, there are now 190,000 more Australian kids at universities than there were before.
Because we took a policy decision which said if you are able, on merit to get into university, Australia should give you a place to be in university.
And as a result of that, 190,000 more young Australians are now at university who weren’t there only five or six years ago. I think that’s a great Labor achievement.
So whether it’s schools, or whether it’s trades training centres, or whether it’s universities, we’re out there making a difference for peoples’ lives, and that’s why we’ve got to continue the work we’ve set out to do.
And one of the areas we’re going to continue to set out that work is through our new national Better Schools Plan.
And that is for better futures for our kids. And this is a very large investment into the future of our schools. It’s needs-based funding, it lifts the standards of our teachers.
It also ensures that we’re offering quality curriculum to our kids because we want every kid to make the most of their lives and then give back as much as they can to Australia.
One final thing about our local candidate here. She has a whole lot of guts and determination.
She is out there in the community working hard, and what I’d say to all you good local people is when you get to the next election, I want Susan Templeman as the next Member for Macquarie.
TEMPLEMAN: This is a fabulous community and we’re really honoured that the Prime Minister has come here on his first weekend as PM in this term.
So we welcome him, a big cheer to welcome Kevin! And we look forward to having you back many more times.
PM: I will be. Now does anyone else have a question for me.
JOURNALIST: Do we have an election date yet?
PM: Consistent with Australia’s Constitution, we will determine that based on all the necessary criteria and we’ll act according to the Constitution.
In the meantime, the government of Australia continues and I'm the Prime Minister of that government, and we’ve got more things to do.
JOURNALIST: Will you raise the prospect of Tony Abbott starting a war with Indonesia when you meet with President Yudhoyono?
PM: What I said, very simply, was this. Mr Abbott has to answer two questions. He says that he will send the boats back to Indonesia.
Number one question, what will he do when a boat sinks? Number two, what will he do if he pushes a boat back, and the Indonesian naval forces push it back in our direction, because their policy is they will not take boats back?
These are two questions for Mr Abbott to answer, and I just say if he doesn’t answer those two questions, he’s not fair dinkum about his policy.
Remember, this bloke is saying that – he’s already written his victory speech, he’s said to everyone that – he says he’s going to be Prime Minister in several months’ time.
Well on top of that he’s got a very basic question to ask about this policy.
Number one, what happens if a boat sinks, and number two, what happens if the Indonesians push the boat back?
He hasn’t answered either of those things, so either it’s a fair dinkum policy, or it’s simply codswallop to try and win some votes.
Next question.
JOURNALIST: Do you regret those comments?
PM: I stand by everything I said, including the fact that my responsibility as Prime Minister is to ensure we have a first-class relationship with 250 million people in Indonesia, a country which constitutes our most important neighbour.
Any others before I go?
JOURNALIST: How buoyed are you by the poll?
PM: Well I think we’re doing okay but we’ve got a long, long way to go, and having said that folks, we’ve got to zip because I've got to head back into Sydney.
Thanks folks.
[ENDS]


Today I announce changes to the Cabinet and Ministry that I will recommend to Her Excellency the Governor-General.
The team I am announcing today are a strong, smart and experienced group of people who will continue to deliver the great work that this Government is doing.
This is a strong team to build our economy for the future.
Cabinet changes
The Deputy Prime Minister, Anthony Albanese, will take on the Broadband, Communications and the Digital Economy portfolio in addition to Infrastructure and Transport.
The Treasurer, Chris Bowen’s responsibilities will include Financial Services and Superannuation.
Jacinta Collins, Deputy Leader of the Government in the Senate, joins the Cabinet as Minister for Mental Health and Ageing.
Bill Shorten will serve as Education and Workplace Relations Minister.
Tony Burke will be the new Minister for Immigration, Multicultural Affairs and Citizenship, as well as retaining the Arts portfolio.
Brendan O’Connor will serve as the Minister for Employment, and for Skills and Training.
Kim Carr will join the Cabinet as the Minister for Innovation, Industry, Science and Research and Minister for Higher Education.
Julie Collins will also join the Cabinet as the Minister responsible for Housing and Homelessness, Community Services, Status of Women, and Indigenous Employment and Economic Development.
Mark Butler will take on the portfolios of Climate Change, Environment, Heritage and Water.
Catherine King will now serve in Cabinet as the Minister for Regional Australia, Local Government and Territories.
Joel Fitzgibbon joins the Cabinet as Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry.
As does Richard Marles as the Minister for Trade.
Tanya Plibersek will add Medical Research to her responsibilities as Minister for Health.
Ministry changes
Kate Ellis will add the Youth portfolio to her current responsibilities.
In addition to his current portfolio, David Bradbury will assist the Treasurer in the Financial Services and Superannuation portfolio.
Kate Lundy will be the Minister for Multicultural Affairs, as well as the Minister Assisting for Industry and Innovation and for the Digital Economy.
Don Farrell will be the new Minister for Sport and continue to assist the Minister for Tourism.
Sharon Bird will join the ministry in the Regional Development, Regional Communications and Road Safety portfolios.
Melissa Parke will also join the ministry as the first Minister for International Development.
I am also announcing a number of changes to Parliamentary Secretary responsibilities.
Parliamentary Secretary changes
Kelvin Thomson will be the Parliamentary Secretary for Schools.
Amanda Rishworth will take on the new responsibility for Environment and Urban Water in addition to her current responsibilities for Disabilities and Carers.
Alan Griffin will be the Cabinet Secretary and Parliamentary Secretary to the Prime Minister.
Ed Husic will also be the Parliamentary Secretary to the Prime Minister. He will also be the Parliamentary Secretary for Broadband.
Matt Thistlethwaite will add Infrastructure and Transport to his existing responsibilities.
Doug Cameron will be the new Parliamentary Secretary for Housing and Homelessness.
I want to thank all Ministers who have served the Government so well in their current portfolios.
I will recommend to Her Excellency the Governor-General that the new Ministry be sworn in on Monday 1 July 2013.
The full list can be viewed at http://www.dpmc.gov.au/parliamentary/index.cfm


Australians with significant and permanent disability will for the first time have the power to choose the support they need and how that support is provided, with today's historic launch of DisabilityCare Australia.
DisabilityCare Australia, the national disability insurance scheme, today opens for business in four launch sites across the country; the Hunter area in New South Wales, Geelong and the Barwon area in Victoria, in South Australia for children and in Tasmania for young people.
This is a momentous achievement for Australia, finally giving people with disability, their families and carers the certainty they deserve.
DisabilityCare Australia will give Australians the peace of mind that if they, their child or a loved one has a significant and permanent disability, they will get the support they need, when they need it, over their lifetime.
More than 26,000 people with disability, their families and carers will benefit from the first stage of DisabilityCare Australia, which will be gradually implemented to ensure we establish a sustainable national scheme and that people can transition into the scheme smoothly.
DisabilityCare Australia has staff and offices in each of the launch sites, and from today, people in launch sites who are accessing specialist disability services will start moving into the scheme.
DisabilityCare Australia has started getting in contact with these people through their current providers and has already made appointments with many of the people who are due to move into the scheme during July.
People with significant and permanent disability in launch sites who are not accessing specialist disability supports can contact the scheme at any time.
The online My Access Checker tool is available to help determine whether they can access DisabilityCare, and staff members at the local shopfronts are ready to assist people through the process.
DisabilityCare Australia will enable people with disability to choose supports that best meet their individual needs and preferences.
DisabilityCare Australia’s Local Area Coordinators will work one-on-one with people with disability to link them into their communities, and DisabilityCare will provide a comprehensive information and referral service to help people with disability access mainstream, disability and community supports.
When the full scheme is rolled out nationally by July 2019, about 460,000 Australians with disability will get the support they deserve.
The 2013-14 Federal Budget provided $14.3 billion over seven years to 2018-19 to roll out DisabilityCare Australia nationally, on top of existing Commonwealth disability funding.
DisabilityCare Australia has long-term funding certainty through an increase to the Medicare Levy of 0.5 percentage points—every cent of which will go towards funding DisabilityCare.
DisabilityCare Australia will launch across the Australian Capital Territory and the Barkly region in the Northern Territory in 2014.
For more information about DisabilityCare Australia, call 1800 800 110 or go to www.disabilitycareaustralia.gov.au
High resolution images, and video and audio grabs from each launch site are available at: www.disabilitycareaustralia.gov.au/news


Prime Minister, Minister for Higher Education
Bogor, Indonesia
Prime Minister Kevin Rudd announced today that the Australian Government will increase people to people links with Indonesia by funding study experiences for Australian students, new specialised research on the bilateral relationship, and a festival showcasing Australia to our largest neighbour.
The Australian Government will provide $47 million over four years for the AsiaBound with $10.6 million for the program’s first year of operation.
The first group of AsiaBound student grants will allow 3700 Australian students to study in Asia, including more than 400 in Indonesia.
Supporting this study is an important investment in Australia’s future. A study experience in Asia is an invaluable way for Australians to broaden and deepen their understanding of the region’s cultures and languages. AsiaBound will enhance essential people-to-people links in the region and build workforce capabilities.
The Australian Government is also providing $10 million to the Lowy Institute for specialised research, dialogues and partnerships to strengthen the institute’s focus on Asia and increase its presence in the region.
The institute’s Engaging Asia Project will have an early focus on Indonesia, which is one of Australia’s most important neighbours, and will raise Indonesia’s public profile in Australia.
The Australian Government will be seeking the institute’s expert input through new research on the Australia-Indonesia relationship, the Indonesian economy and Indonesia as an emerging foreign policy participant in the region.
OzFest Indonesia, a 3-month long festival of Australian culture, art, science and technology and sport will take place in major centres across Indonesia from January to April 2014. The festival will showcase a dynamic and contemporary Australia to Indonesia, and further build people-to-people links between our two countries.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
In 2007 – less than a month after I became Prime Minister – Indonesia was the destination of my first overseas visit.
Today, in 2013, I am pleased to return here once again in my capacity as Prime Minister and to meet again with my counterpart, and good friend, President Yudhoyono.
In these five-and-a-half years, I have been to Indonesia ten times.
This is a beautiful country.
Thérèse and I love this country and its people.
And it is good to be back again.
During this period, I have seen Australia’s bilateral relationship with Indonesia become a keystone of our foreign policy.
Today, Australia and Indonesia are much more than near neighbours. 
We are close partners.
We are strategic partners.
We are strong, proud democracies.
We sit at the same diplomatic tables around the world – the G20, APEC, the East Asia Summit.
Both our countries are living through a time of truly historic change.
200 years ago, China and India were the world’s largest economies.
But in the two centuries since, the defining feature of the world economy has been the gap between the industrialised West and the developing East.
A gap that has meant a vast difference in opportunity and prosperity.
Samuel Huntington called the separation of these two economic hemispheres ‘the Great Divergence’.
Today, we are living through the ‘Great Convergence’.
The mature economies of the United States, Europe and Japan continue to grapple with the aftermath of the Global Financial Crisis.
Meanwhile the Asia Pacific region, our region, is undergoing an economic transformation of a scale and speed that dwarf those witnessed during the Industrial Revolution.
When I first became Prime Minister in 2007, the previous six years had seen a million people in Asia lifted out of poverty every week.
Across our Asian hemisphere, income per person doubled within a decade.
After the Industrial Revolution, it  took the United Kingdom  50 years to achieve that doubling. 
Urbanisation is transforming Asia.
By 2050 the world population is expected to grow by 2.3 billion.
That entire increase will be absorbed by cities.
Asian cities alone will house an extra 1.4 billion people.
The pace and power of these changes can be clearly seen here in Indonesia.
Today, as the global economic centre of gravity shifts to Asia, Indonesia is poised to take its place as one of the world’s largest economies.
A trillion dollar economy in the next few years.
 Number seven in the world by 2030, number four by 2050.
A rise as rapid as it is impressive.
Australian businesses in particular should take note of this.
Everywhere we turn, there are remarkable statistics.
Today Indonesia has more billionaires than Japan – and more per capita than India or China.
In Jakarta, the minimum wage rose by 44 per cent this year alone.
This economic change is driving a massive social transformation.
Not just freeing people from poverty.
But giving them a standard of living that would have been unimaginable a generation ago.
Today Indonesia is home to a young population looking to engage with the world.
50 per cent of the Indonesian population is under 30.
Indonesia is the world’s third largest market for Facebook and Jakarta is the most active Twitter City in the world.
I’m hoping to add a few friends and pick up a few followers while I’m here.
The potential ‘demographic dividend’ of this generation of young, tech-savvy, global citizens is truly stunning.
Already, Indonesia’s ‘consuming class’ is larger than Australia’s population. 
By 2030,  the Indonesian middle class will be 135 million strong.
Their purchasing power will drive an unprecedented expansion in demand for goods and services. 
Indonesia should become a vast marketplace for Australian goods, services and industry.
A marketplace where a surging middle class will create a demand for new goods and services to suit their changing tastes, lifestyle and household income.
In this time of change and opportunity, you will be the ones who will make the Australia-Indonesia business relationship flourish.
Beef cattle is just one area where we can build a genuine business partnership.
By 2015 Indonesian beef consumption of 530 000 tonnes will exceed domestic production.
Together, we can do more than simply satisfy rising domestic demand and ensure a steady supply of beef for Indonesia, we can build a value chain to satisfy the markets of the world.
Consider our complementary strengths.
Indonesia is already a world leader in fattening and finishing cattle, with some of the very best intensive feedlots.
And Australia’s extensive grazing lands and tradition of pastoral excellence, allow us to breed high-quality beef cattle at a competitive price. 
Realising our collective potential will require shared vision and concerted effort.
It begins with a relaxation of supply constraints for the Indonesian beef market.
This alone could provide the necessary kickstart for further investment and cooperation.
In the services sector there are exciting new markets to be developed.
The financial services sector is an important sub-set.
The opportunities that exist in financial services are ones that can deliver greater financial security to those millions of Indonesians who currently live outside the formal financial system.
An estimated 58 per cent of adult Indonesians do not have a bank account.
A very much smaller percentage are insured – some estimates suggest as low as 14 per cent.
How, in such a scenario, can individuals or households save, borrow, build up a credit history, invest, or even properly manage risk?
This is an expanding area of demand for Australian expertise, that also delivers a beneficial outcome for Indonesia.
In education, there are already 100,000 Indonesians with degrees from Australian Universities.
And today, around a quarter of Indonesian international students choose to study in Australia.
As you have experienced, often the connections made in an educational exchange provide the foundation for a future business relationship.
Just as the growing number of research partnerships between Australia’s CSIRO and Indonesia’s BPPT (Agency for the Assessment and Application of Technology) provide a pathway to future innovation and cooperation.
But for all the success, there is still a world of untapped potential that awaits.
You know the figures.
In 2011-2012, all the two-way trade between our countries only added up to $14.9 billion dollars.
In two-way investment, Indonesia remains outside of Australia’s top ten partners.
We do not need to look far to find opportunities to do better.
Infrastructure is just one example of a mutually beneficial area for investment.
With global growth forecast at 3¼ per cent, still below the pre-GFC trend of around 5 per cent, the G20’s key priority is to rebuild consumer confidence and re-energise private spending.
Some of this can be achieved through infrastructure projects.
For example, Indonesia has positioned infrastructure as a central topic for APEC this year.
The G20 is also working on infrastructure to bolster global economic growth and Australia will be giving this issue high priority.
In the next two years of the G20, I am confident we can work together to strengthen the focus and outcomes on infrastructure.
Infrastructure investment is a case study that reveals just how much stronger our trade and investment relationship can be – provided we have the right plan and process. 
With this in mind, it is my pleasure to launch Towards 2025 – Australia’s Indonesia Country Strategy.
A document that outlines the broad pathway to the stronger trade and investment relationship we can have.
This country strategy advances the objective from the Australia in the Asian Century White Paper to build stronger and more comprehensive relationships with countries across the region.
It outlines a vision of where our relationship with Indonesia should be in 2025 and how we intend to get there.
Governments in both countries must commit to securing market access, lowering trade and investment barriers, and establishing regulatory certainty.
Just as importantly, business groups like you need to form a common view about opportunities in Indonesia and Australia – and work together to spread the good word.
 Delegation visits and high-level investor-matching and support all add to the experience of a business transaction and greatly increase the likelihood of return custom.
That’s why I commit that, if re-elected as Prime Minister of Australia in federal elections this year, I will lead a high level business delegation from Australia’s top businesses to Indonesia by the end of 2013.
This will be the next big step in bringing our Country Strategy to reality.
I want Australia’s best and brightest business minds engaging directly with their counterparts and making sure we fully unlock the potential of what is on offer.
Above all, to succeed we must do more than remove impediments – we must create partnerships. 
Formal agreements like the Indonesia-Australia Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement now under negotiation and advocacy organisations like the Indonesia-Australia Business Partnership Group have an important role to play. 
But also partnerships created through everyday business.
Like the joint venture between Australia’s single largest exporter of wheat to Indonesia, Western Australia’s CBH Group, and the PT Eastern Pearl Flour Mill in Makassar.
The fourth largest single-site flour mill in the world, with a processing capacity of 840,000 tonnes of flour a year.
This is a partnership that’s helping to meet Indonesia’s food needs and creating local jobs and investment, while helping Australian wheat growers supply a crucial value chain.
For a nation like Indonesia, with its youthful profile, and with the ASEAN single market just around the corner, the challenge is to quickly deepen the pool of highly skilled workers.
Australia is already lending a hand with this human capital development, through our educational partnerships, our scholarship programs and the focus of our development work.
On cattle stations across northern Australia, Indonesian animal husbandry students are getting intensive industry training in a program developed by the world’s best – the Northern Territory Cattlemen’s Association. 
The Australian Vocational Education Training Program, where directors from up to 20 Indonesian polytechnic institutes travel to Australian TAFE colleges, is another great example of a growing trend in the intercultural exchange of skills. 
The Australian government is dedicated to enhancing these educational connections.
This year we will provide financial support to more than 400 Australians to study in Indonesia under our AsiaBound program.
Today I am also pleased to announce that the Government will provide $10 million to fund Australia’s Lowy Institute’s Engaging Asia Project. 
This program will support new research, dialogues and partnerships in the region and strengthen the Institute’s focus on Asia – particularly Indonesia.
And I acknowledge the Honourable James Spigelman AC,  Chair of the Australian Broadcasting Corporation, who is present here today from the Lowy Board of Directors.
In the same spirit, our Embassy here in Jakarta will be hosting OzFest Indonesia from January to April 2014.
A program of events that will showcase the best of Australian performing and visual arts, our great national passion for sport, and our world-class science, education and innovation sectors.
This is all part of the larger project of bridging the perception gap between us: as communities we should know each other better.
A much bigger event on our immediate horizon is the APEC summit that Indonesia will host in October this year in Bali.
Indonesia and Australia were both present at the creation of APEC in 1989.
Our business communities are both active in the work program of the APEC Business Advisory Council.
We are also both key players in the G20, which Australia is looking forward to hosting next year in Brisbane.
These forums are critical to global economic prosperity, and we need to build strategic continuity between the APEC and G20 agendas.
As a member of the G20 troika, Australia is also talking with ASEAN member nations on these goals, in particular with Indonesia, as the largest economy of ASEAN, and a G20 member.
Next year marks the 40th year of ASEAN-Australian relations, and today I announce that the Australian Government has nominated Simon Merrifield as Australia’s first resident ambassador to ASEAN.
Australia has long been a believer in the constructive and cooperative power of multilateral forums. 
I propose greater engagement still in the lead-up to Australia’s hosting of the G20.
One thing I would like to see is greater engagement with communities of interest that sit outside the formal G20 structure: civil society, business, think tanks, labour, young people.
There’s already a considerable volume of good work occurring outside the formal G20 structures, through associated fora such as Business 20, Think 20, the Y20 and Civil 20.
But if you take Business 20 as an example, it is still dominated by business groups from the advanced economies.
And while those voices need to be heard and have great value to add, so too for the voices of those from the emerging economies, particularly the emerging economies of Asia.
I know that the Australian B20 leadership team preparing for our host year in 2014, led by Wesfarmers CEO Richard Goyder, shares my belief and will be encouraging those new voices.
As close as Australia and Indonesia are diplomatically– the real barometer of our relationship will always be people-to-people links.
No-one understands this better than you, the people who have done so much for Indonesian and Australian business connections.
You are the first wave of our mature and modern trade relationship.
And part of your role as stewards of this relationship is to help shape the next wave.
It is great that so many crucial players can be here today.
Leaders from groups like Kadin and the Indonesian-Australian Business Council which have led the way in strengthening the trade and commercial ties between our countries.
And all of you who have been generous with your ideas as we  continue to develop the Indonesia-Australia Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement.
Your passion and vision for the Indonesia-Australia relationship goes back a long way.
With an audience like this, I do not need to spruik the importance of engagement between Australia and the rest of Asia.
You live and breathe these things.
But I do want to assure you that I share your passion.
I leave you today with an Indonesian saying, ‘tak kenal maka tak sayang’.
If we do not know each other, we would not care for each other.
Today, Australia and Indonesia know and care for each other better than at any time in our history.
And I look forward to working with you to build a new era in this relationship.



Terima kasih Bapak President.  Selamat siang, memang bagus sekali kembali ke Indonesia.  Maaf bahasa saya kurang lancar.
[Thank you Mr President. Good afternoon, it is indeed good to return to Indonesia. I apologise that my Bahasa is not fluent]
Indonesia is a great country and Bapak President thank you for your kind invitation to be back here again. I am pleased to be here for the third Australia-Indonesia Leaders’ Meeting.
Indonesia is critical to Australia’s interests. I believe Australia is critical to Indonesia’s interests.  Indonesia is also emerging as an economic powerhouse of South East Asia. GDP of one trillion US dollars. 
It is the fifteenth largest economy in the world; by 2030 it is estimated to be the seventh largest economy in the world; and by 2050 the fourth largest economy in the world behind China, the US and India. Something big is happening in Indonesia and everyone in Australia and the world should pay attention. 
This is a population of 250 million people. Massive social transformation is underway and for Australia this means that across our nation, whether it is those engaged in politics, whether it is those engaged in business, whether it's those engaged in education, or whether it’s those engaged in the community sector, we need to bring these two great economies together and forge a great future. And that is what I am personally dedicated to doing.
Since 2007 we have had almost 130 two way high level visits between Australia and Indonesia. We’re been busy. I’ve been here about ten times myself and SBY has been to Australia as well, and I’ve been pleased to receive him there. 
Indonesia is also the only ASEAN member of the G20, a meeting which of course we will host at summit level in Australia in my own home city of Brisbane next year. 
Our defence relationship is strong. It’s our most important in the region.
We’re signed defence cooperation agreements and we’ve held our inaugural defence ministers meeting only last year. Indonesia is one of our most important terrorism partners and SBY I congratulate Indonesia and our good friends in the TNI and the Indonesian police and in the other Indonesian government agencies for the work we do together to combat our common enemy of terrorism. 
We talk about the future. I believe a core message from this meeting is we need to expand our economic horizons – do much more in terms of the economic relationship between us.  Indonesia is our twelfth largest trading partner, but trade is still only worth around fifteen billion between us. We can do with imagination and hard work a lot more than that. 
SBY and I confirmed our commitment to the Indonesia Australia Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement, the first round of negotiations occurred in March this year. There is a lot of work to be done, but I’m sure Bapak President and myself will be encouraging the negotiators to reach agreement as soon as possible.
Food security is also critical to the quarter of a billion people who live in this vast archipelago. Today we discussed how to advance this in terms of our cooperation in the beef industry. 
I was pleased to announce the establishment of the Indonesia Australia red meat and cattle forum. A sixty million dollar ten year initiative to boost investment in the red meat agri-business sector in Indonesia. Good for Australian beef industry.  Good for Indonesian investors and good also for Indonesian consumers. 
The President and I also discussed extensively cattle exports to Indonesia, and I thank Indonesia for its cooperation given recent challenges. And of course we’ve also discussed the continuing challenges of animal welfare.
Indonesia will host APEC in October this year in Bali. Bapak President has indicated the theme for APEC is economic resilience. I support him in that. 
It is an important message for all of us given the challenges of the global economy. Maintaining economic resilience in Asia, because now the global economy depends on the health of our region like never before. 
As I said before, we have the G20 in Brisbane next year and I look forward very much to coordinating with the President of Indonesia how we build on his theme of economic resilience into the agenda of the G20 as well.
The President has also mentioned our cooperation in the area of people smuggling and I acknowledge the strong work that he and his officials have done in this area. I congratulate the President on his new initiative, that is, to convene a regional ministerial meeting of key origin, transit and destination countries.
A conference to explore concrete operational policy responses, including new regional responses and actions to enhance border security in addressing the problem of irregular movements of persons.
As the President of Indonesia just said, this problem of people smuggling is a problem for our entire region. Therefore the President’s initiative is for all of us to work now together, and I salute you, Mr President, on your bold initiative in hosting, in the immediate period, ahead a ministerial conference to bring about concrete actions to reduce this problem for all of us.
Furthermore, could I also congratulate the President more broadly for his work as an international statesman. President Yudhoyono is now known throughout the world. Not just because he is the leader of the world’s largest Muslim country. Not just because there are a quarter of a billion people who live here. Not just because you have successfully transformed this country into a modern democracy and a growing economy. But also for the President’s personal contribution in these areas as well. 
President Yudhoyono has in his period as President consolidated the transformation of Indonesia into a strong robust democracy, and I publicly thank you for that SBY.
 You have also presided over the growing strength of this economy. Six per cent average annual growth over the period of your presidency, making this into the big economy it is today. On the wider world stage also, the work you have done with the United Nations as the co-chair of the UN Secretary General’s high level panel of eminent persons; on the post 2015 development agenda; the future of the Millennium Development Goals. 
SBY is representing the Republic of Indonesia, is having a crucial voice in the councils of the world in shaping the future global campaign to reduce poverty, and eliminate extreme poverty, for all the peoples of the world.
Finally, SBY referred to the important challenge which he faces and the region also confronts in terms of security.  He also referred in particular to the challenges which still exist within Papua.
I would like to publicly reaffirm here what successive Australian Prime Ministers have done in the past which is that Australia recognises now, has recognised in the past, and will recognise into the future the territorial integrity of the Republic of Indonesia. That includes Papua. 
Secondly, I would also congratulate the President’s strong leadership in what he’s described as his autonomy plus package for the future of Papua.  I encourage him in this direction and I’ve said as the Prime Minister of Australia I will do everything I can to support him in this important direction as well.
The President of Indonesia, President Yudhoyono, has achieved already huge success in Aceh. To the extent that the entire international community has looked with great appreciation at what he’s achieved there.  Australia, Bapak President, wants to work with you in a way which you would best suggest we can be helpful in making sure that we bring about a long term, stable, peaceful, prosperous and secure Papua as part of the Republic of Indonesia.
Bapak President, thank you so much for your hospitality. 
Thank you also to Ibu Ani, who is here somewhere perhaps, who has been kindly hosting my wife Therese.  Therese has brought to Ibu Ani a yellow rose for planting in the Presidential Palace in Jakarta which was taken out of the Rose Garden at Parliament House in Canberra.  Something that they visited together when Ibu Ani and Bapak President were there in March of 2010. 
I hope the yellow rose blooms well in your garden and as it does, remember not just our wives, Ibu Ani and Thérèse, but also our friendship and also remember the friendship between the peoples of Australia and Indonesia. 
Thank you Bapak President.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED 
A warm welcome, Your Excellency, and a warm welcome also to you, First Lady of Timor-Leste, Ms Isabel Ferreira.
Your Excellency, I know that you are no stranger to Australia.
Your previous visits as Chief of the Defence Force have a lasting legacy in the enduring links you forged with Australia’s military leadership.
However, this is your first visit as President, and it is a privilege to welcome an old friend in a new and distinguished capacity.
 Mr President, I have also been a frequent visitor to your beautiful country over the years.
Timor-Leste was one of the first countries I visited as Prime Minister, reflecting the importance I personally place on our relationship.
I last visited Timor-Leste as Foreign Minister in July 2011. 
I visited Timor-Leste’s National Police Academy – supported by the AFP’s Timor-Leste Police Development Program. 
I travelled to Maliana in Timor-Leste’s west to visit a farming community benefitting from the AusAID and ACIAR-supported Seeds of Life program.
The friendship between our people goes back far beyond independence in 2002.
It was forged in the jungles of World War II, when brave and selfless Timorese locals gave shelter, food and assistance to the Australian soldiers of Sparrow Force.
These ties were strengthened from the mid-1970s onwards, when Timorese communities established themselves in Melbourne, Sydney and Darwin.
Our friendship deepened again when Australia led the multilateral INTERFET force after the independence ballot.
And again when we participated in the UN International Stabilisation Force.
Many Timorese who made a safe home here in Australia during those difficult years of conflict have now returned to Timor-Leste.
Lending their energies and talents to the building of a proud new nation.
Now, a decade on from independence, our relationship is that of close neighbours, good friends and partners.
History tells us it can take a nation a generation, or more, to build resilience and confidence after conflict.
Timor-Leste has turned its face to the future with resolve and energy.
And in one short decade it has laid the foundations of a modern state.
It has been a transition to a more stable and self-determined future.
But a future in which friends are still within hearing, still there with a hand outstretched.
So, while domestic and military security is now in the hands of Timor-Leste’s own, home-grown forces, Australia is still there, helping to build local capacity through our bilateral defence and policing programs.
And Australians are working side by side with locals to help achieve the Timor-Leste Government’s ambitious development goals.
Delivering health and education projects.
Ensuring that women get the health services they need during pregnancy.
Delivering water and sanitation infrastructure.
Pursuing rural development goals.
Re-building the rural roads so essential to economic supply chains.
Repairing destroyed schools, so that children can get the education they deserve.
The students enrolled in primary education rose from 190,000 in 2000, to almost 239,000 in 2010, a significant achievement.
Today almost half of the students who complete primary school are girls.
We’ll continue to work together – and in partnership with others in the region.
Last week in Indonesia I met President Yudhoyono and I note – Mr President – that you also visited Indonesia on a state visit last month. 
The inaugural trilateral leaders meeting between our three countries  was held November 2012 and we look forward to further discussions.
I am heartened to see that we both have such strong relationships with our near neighbour.
And all three nations are committed to exploring the possibilities of working more closely together.
The Seasonal Worker Program is another example of a new area where we are working together for mutual benefit.
People, and the connections between them, have historically been at the heart of the relationship between Timor-Leste and Australia.
That won’t change.
Whatever our shared path over the coming years, we will tread it together.
Your Excellency – obrigardo wain.
I thank you for honouring us with your visit.
You are among friends.


Today the Australian and Tasmanian Governments have reached an historic agreement that will deliver long term improvements for every one of the 81,000 school students in Tasmania. 
This is not just an investment in schools, this is a down payment on the long-term strength of the Australian economy, and will underwrite higher productivity for decades to come. 
Tasmania becomes the fourth jurisdiction to agree to the National Education Reform Agreement, with its students now supported by three key measures:
&gt;an ambitious goal for Australia to be in the top five in the world in reading, maths and science by 2025, and rated as high quality and high equity.
&gt;continued reform under the Better Schools in the areas we know drive better student outcomes including: quality teaching; quality learning; empowered school leadership; meeting student need; and transparency and accountability; and
&gt;funding arrangements that are based on the needs of individual students and individual schools.
For the first time, all funding will be linked to education reforms with this investment supporting the long term future of Australia. 
Funding will be targeted on lifting school performance and giving each and every student in Tasmania a world-class education, no matter where they live, the school they attend or their family background. 
The Heads of Agreement that provides the detail of this reform for Tasmania which will see annual funding allocations for Tasmanian schools rise to $1.4 billion in 2019. 
Over the six years of the new agreement, the Australian and Tasmanian Governments will invest more than $380 million in extra funding between 2014 and 2019. 
Put simply, these indexation arrangements mean all schools in Tasmania – Government, Independent and Catholic – will see fair funding growth each year.
To achieve this, the Australian Government has committed to grow its school education spending by 4.7 per cent per year from 2014 into 2015 and throughout the agreement. 
In return, consistent with its 2013/14 Budget, Tasmania has agreed to grow its 2015 base funding by 3 per cent to 2016 and will continue to do so every year thereafter. 
The Tasmanian government will also introduce a new school funding model for Government schools, the Fairer Funding Model (FFM), to ensure resources are targeted to where they are needed most. 
The agreement made today will benefit principals and teachers, who will see improved workforce flexibility and productivity, more training and support, and greater autonomy in decision making in schools. Parents and community organisations will see more transparency around school performance and funding so they can be more informed and involved in the education of their children. 
With Tasmania now joining New South Wales, South Australia and the Australian Capital Territory in signing up to the reforms, and with the passing of the Australian Education Act 2013, 63 per cent of Australian school students will receive increased funding from the 2014 school year.



CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED 
I would like to acknowledge the traditional owners of the land on which we meet, the Gumatj and Rirratjingu clans of the Yolngu people, and pay my respects to their elders, past and present.
Fifty years ago, in this small community, in this remote part of paradise, two of Australia’s most important founding documents were drawn up.
Four thousand kilometres from a Canberra winter, and the bricks and mortar that represent our system of parliamentary democracy.
Far from the Houses of Parliament and from the formal courtrooms where our grievances are settled.
The Yirrkala Bark Petitions were drawn up using the ochre of the land. The bark of the trees.
The Yolngu used art in those founding documents, because that is the language of their law.
Exquisitely drawn images,
That tell the story of their relationship to the land.
And through that relationship, proclaiming their title to that land.
Their right to have a say over what happens to the land they have cared for, for thousands of years.
Then, to be doubly secure, the signatories translated that proclamation into language for people 4000km away to understand.
The language of ‘honourables’ and ‘excisions’, ‘humble petitioners’ and requests for committees of enquiry.
Two languages, but one message - of inalienable title.
The Yirrkala Bark Petitions were a documentary bridge between two noble legal traditions.
They became the first traditional documents to be recognised by an Australian Parliament.
Fifty years on, they stand among the founding documents of our nation.
Friends, we know that the hopes the signatories had of the Yirrkala Bark Petitions were not realised.
The excision of land was upheld. The bauxite mine went ahead.
A subsequent court challenge to secure land rights failed.
The bridge between our two cultures, our two laws, and our understanding of this ancient land was not yet strong enough.
Justice Blackburn himself, in refusing to recognise Aboriginal title in this place in his 1971 judgement:
“The question is not one of fact, but of law”.
One law. But not Yolngu law.
The Bark Petitions may not have effected their immediate aims.
But these crucial documents triggered a chain of historic events.
The beginnings of an understanding that there was another, older, law in place on this land.
Perhaps the most significant part of Justice Blackburn’s judgment was his statement that:
"If ever there was government by law rather than government by man then this is it."
Because it was this understanding that was the catalyst that led first to the Woodward Royal Commission.
Then, in 1976, to the passage of the Northern Territory Aboriginal Land Rights Act.
A process that culminated - three decades later - in Mabo, and the overturning of the doctrine of terra nullius.
Important changes to our nation’s laws.
But perhaps more importantly, changes to our national story.
It has been these changes that, piece by piece and over time, propelled us, compelled us, to deliver the national apology. 
On that day, it was my privilege to say sorry.
And with that word, so long needed, and once heard, to continue to strengthen the bridge between our cultures.
That bridge, which provides the foundation for our work to Close the Gap between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians.
Today, it is the same path to change that is helping us to build support for Constitutional Recognition of Australia’s first peoples.
Another campaign, incidentally, that is deeply rooted here on the Gove Peninsula, with another bark petition.
As Prime Minister, I was proud to accept that petition from Galarrwuy Yunupingu in 2008.
From that petition, the movement for recognition has grown.
So that now, thanks to the hard work of the Expert Panel the Government appointed, we have clear recommendations for what recognition could look like.
The Parliament has passed an Act of Recognition, and established a parliamentary committee to continue work towards a referendum.
Because constitutional change must be a part of a journey that makes all Australians proud.
We must tread that path to change, together.
As I speak to you today, Australians are also gathering in Alice Springs, as the latest stop in the ‘journey to recognition’.
This long walk began in Melbourne and will culminate here in Arnhem Land at the Garma festival.
Along the way, people across Australia have become part of the movement for change.
People like Haydon, a property owner in Murray Bridge in South Australia.
As he saw the journey pass past his gate, Haydon asked what it was all about.
And when Haydon was asked whether he would vote yes, he simply said:
“Oh hell yeah.”
Fifty years on, that is the footprint of the original Yirrkala Bark Petitions.
The legacy of a group of courageous elders who spoke up for their people and against injustice.
Who asserted title to their own lands. And set out their claim in images of great power and symbolism.
Fifty years on, some of those elders are here today.
Wali Wunungmurra, Dhunggala Mununggurr, and Manunu Wunungmurra, all signatories  to the Yirrkala Bark Petitions.
And Dr Gawirrin Gumana, one of the artists who recorded the elders’ eloquent claim for land title on panels in the Yirrkala Methodist Mission Church.
Respected leaders of their people. Welcoming us onto their lands today.
Secure in the knowledge that the rights they asserted all those years ago are now recognised in the law of their country and the laws of this nation.
And their rights translating now into concrete outcomes for their people.
Since the signing of the Gove Mining Agreement with Rio Tinto in 2011 the traditional owners have a stake and a say in the bauxite mine on their land.
Importantly, local businesses and enterprises are leveraging the presence of the mine to deliver jobs and prosperity.
Today, I am pleased to announce that the Australian Government will also be supporting these efforts by traditional owners to drive local economic development, with our own $4.3 million investment in the Laynhapuy and Mangarr homelands, to make housing safer, and improve infrastructure.
An investment that will draw on the skill and energy of locals to deliver these works, to build stronger communities and a stronger local economy.
Ladies and gentlemen, it is a great privilege to be here today to mark the fiftieth anniversary of two remarkable and precious pieces of our nation’s documentary heritage.
Documents that proved to us all that no bridge between traditions is too hard to build.
No translation is too difficult to attempt.
And that courage and conviction can prevail.


Subject(s): National Broadband Network; Constitutional recognition for indigenous Australians; Carbon pricing; Better Schools Plan
PM: It's great to be out here again with Luke, our candidate for Solomon. This is a really important part of what we are doing in Solomon and across Australia.
What are we trying to do? Build an economy for the twenty-first century, build an economy which deals with the challenge of the end of the China resources boom, building the infrastructure of a new economy to take us beyond the resources boom.
This infrastructure is like building a railway network in the nineteenth century or a freeway network in the twentieth century. This is the freeway of the twenty-first century.
Here we are in Darwin, one of the most remote centres in Australia. And remote from the rest of Australia but the gateway to Asia.
This technology is going to revolutionise Darwin's future and the Territory's future with bandwidth and band speed which is going to make sure that any business, any school, any hospital, anyone engaged in practical daily life can link immediately with their counterparts across Asia and across the rest of Australia.
It's going to transform the way in which we do business.
The bottom line is this. With the NBN, we are finally overcoming the tyranny of distance for Australia, overcoming the tyranny of distance for the Territory and for the smallest communities across Australia.
One of the great things about this reform is that we have decided that there shall be no digital divide in Australia between the people who live in downtown Sydney and Melbourne, and Brisbane, and those who live out in the regions.
Everybody should have access at affordable prices to the NBN, so that they can make sure that their businesses or their organisations are going to function effectively in the twenty-first century.
So what does it mean here in this neck of the woods, in this part of Darwin? This Friday, we're going to have switched on 2600 homes across Darwin for access to the NBN.
This is the beginning of a huge project for Darwin and the Territory. Of course right across the Territory we're going to see this happen as well.
Fibre construction on Darwin's NBN has already commenced with more than 25,000 homes and businesses.
And we've seen the rollout activity in areas like Bayview, Casuarina, Darwin City, East Point, Eaton, Fannie Bay, The Gardens, Larrakeyah, Ludmilla, The Narrows, Parap, Stuart Park, Alawa, Anula, Leanyer, Lyons, Malak, Marrara, Moil, Tiwi, Wagaman, Wanguri and Woolner, and I am sorry if I mispronounced any of those.
But the bottom line is it's coming to a suburb and a community near you in Darwin and through our use of wireless and satellite technologies right across the Territory as well.
The whole point is this is the future. Copper is the past.
Mr Abbott, and surprisingly Mr Turnbull, represent the technologies of the past.
Mr Turnbull knows better. He is just doing what Mr Abbott is telling him to do.
For the future, it is fibre optic, every modern economy around the world is laying out fibre optic.
In ten years’ time we will look back on this day and say why didn't we do it ten years earlier? That is what we will say.
If in ten years’ time the other mob get in and they decide to go back to good old nineteenth early twentieth century copper, everyone will shake their heads in wonder as to how this pack of mugs in Australia, the alternative government of Australia, could think that this was a solution for the future.
This is about the economy, it's about health, it's about education, it's about the future. And I'm proud to be part of it.
Final word – when I first put my name to the Australian people to become their Prime Minister in 2007, I said we would build a National Broadband Network.
We're the party of nation builders. We're out across every city and centre in the nation, either building it now, laying it out now, or planning for the layout over the next couple of years.
This is the largest engineering project in Australia's history.
I am proud to be the Prime Minister who took to it the people first up and I'm proud to see the product of our work here in the suburbs of Darwin today.
Over to you.
JOURNALIST: A question pertinent to events later today. There seems to be some disquiet in East Arnhem Land about your timetable to amend the Constitution to recognise the indigenous population. What is your timetable?
PM: My view is that we should be in the business of bringing about constitutional recognition for the First Australians as soon as possible.
Remember, I committed prior to 2007 that an early act of the then Australian Government was to have a national apology to Aboriginal Australians and the Forgotten Generations. We did that.
We are now committed to rolling out the constitutional recognition for the First Australians and we want to get that work done.
There's just one thing we need to make sure that is done on the way through: to get bipartisan support from Mr Abbott's party.
The history of Australian referendums is that if you don't get bipartisan support, they will go down.
So what I want to make sure happens is that we get bipartisan support and then get to it the people as soon as possible.
I want this done in the next term of the Australian parliament. That is what I really want to see. And I really want to achieve that bipartisan consensus as rapidly as possible.
JOURNALIST: Mr Abbott says the he was Prime Minister he would release a draft amendment within the first 12 months of office. Can you match that?
PM: Constitutional recognition of indigenous people has been our policy from the beginning.
I find it always surprising when someone like Mr Abbott, who permanently engages in negative politics, begins to provide public lectures to the Australian Government on the question of indigenous policy.
I would say to Mr Abbott, in the parliamentary committee which is now seeking to resolve the question to put the Australian people, get your act together, tell us what you actually want, in detail, black and white, and let's get it done.
The Australian people are waiting for this. The Aboriginal people are waiting for this.
But frankly the ball lies in his court. It really does.
JOURNALIST: One other question on the referendum. Are you committed to the local government referendum proposal?
PM: I am really disappointed at what has happened with the apparent withdrawal of Coalition support for that referendum. I am deeply disappointed.
I have spoken to local governments across Australia who want to see this happen.
So the internal politics of division within the Coalition on this must be frankly just out of control.
You have Nats versus Nats, Libs versus Libs, Libs versus Nats. Frankly the nation deserves better and Australian local government deserves better.
I look forward frankly to having a frank conversation with Mr Abbott.
Of course I could have had it tomorrow if he bothered to show up for the debate in Canberra, about what his actual position is on this.
We have always been committed to making sure that we get this referendum done and dusted.
But it makes it really hard when you've got a withdrawal, an apparent withdrawal of bipartisan support.
JOURNALIST: The NT’s Attorney-General yesterday called for a 50 year exemption to the carbon tax for the Territory because he fears it’s going to jeopardise the future of the Territory and future growth.
PM: On carbon pricing, I just wish the Liberal and National Party would catch up with the twenty-first century.
In China they're introducing carbon pricing. Carbon pricing has been introduced into Europe a long time ago.
It makes for pretty cute, short-term negative politics to constantly bang on about this.
The hard thing in government is to work out what you do about a real problem called climate change.
That is what we are on about. That's what responsible members of the international community are talking about as well.
Can I say to the Northern Territory Government there is a very immediate challenge for the NT Government: are you fair dinkum about signing up to the Better Schools Plan?
I represent the Australian Government. I am here offering to invest, together with my team, $300 million extra into the schools of the Northern Territory over the next six years.
Every school will see increased funding. Every school will see increased funding and I still have stonewalling from the Northern Territory Government, whether they think this is a good idea.
I don't know what is going on up here, but in previous times, if the Prime Minister of Australia came to Darwin and said 'I want to invest $300 million in your schools’ it would take about 45 seconds to get an immediate and positive response.
They may have some real policy concerns about the nature of the plan.
Education Minister Bill Shorten will work with them on that, but the bottom line is this: I want to invest in the best schools possible for the Territory.
$300 million is on the table.
I can't understand why the NT Government want to walk away from that.
They're constantly saying they're cash-strapped up here. There’s $300 million to build better schools, to get better outcomes for our kids.
JOURNALIST: Will there be any give and take on that?
PM: Bill Shorten has been a good Minister. He’s been bringing the Tasmanians on side. That’s been good.
The Tasmanian Government has signed up. The South Australian Government has signed up. The ACT Government has signed up.
And the Government of New South Wales, which when I last looked was a pretty big state in Australia, they’ve signed up.
I think it's time we all put politics to one side, came together, united for the benefit of our kids for the next generation.
So Bill Shorten, I am sure, will be talking to the Chief Minister and his Ministers about this.
But we need to get cracking and get it done. Time is running out.
Thanks folks, all the best.


JOURNALIST: Your speech today took some of us of a certain age back to 1983, with talk of productivity pacts and bringing the nation together.
Bob Hawke of course famously talked about reconciliation, recovery and reconstruction, and made the accord the centrepiece of his bid for government and his subsequent governance.
How formal should this relationship be between the government, business and the unions? Do you’ll be in a position to clearly articulate where those agendas are before the election campaign? And does it provide a way of making unions a positive for Labor rather than a negative?
PM: Thanks Laura. The bottom line is, back in the 1980s, of course the then accord between the government and the trade union movement and business was based at a time of central wage fixation. We're not at that time now.
We have a much more diversified labour market and a more complex array of industrial arrangements as we should in a flexible labour market to meet the demands of the 21st century economy.
However, one of the great, shall I say, psychological products of the period of the then accord, was that it caused business and the unions to actually come together to agree what was important to grow the national economic cake.
What I've seen in recent times is too much, shall I say, just blind adversarialism and I don't point a finger in one direction or the other. It's just been too adversarial. Therefore, I'm not foreshadowing a new accord in the 1980s sense.
What I am foreshadowing – is what I said quite specifically – is a new national competitiveness agenda and with areas of work, some of which our friends in the union movement will be happy with and other agendas of work which those in the BCA will be more happy with.
But the bottom line is: we've actually got to get around a table and start talking more effectively.
You asked further what would be the likelihood of specific agenda items of work made explicit between now and whenever we face the people.
I just intend to preside over this gathering of our key ministers, BCA's key representatives and the ACTU's key representatives to work out what is now the next doable list of micro-economic reforms. Against one objective which is to lift productivity growth.
I think it's a better way to go than just, frankly, throwing bricks at each other and I think some of the politics of class warfare, however exaggerated or not exaggerated, have not served us well in the past.
JOURNALIST: Malcolm Farr from News.com.au, Prime Minister. Could I go to the taxpayer-funded trip of Senator Crossin to Europe with her husband and it might seem a minor matter but I believe it joins an accumulation of instances that have damaged public faith in politics and political institutions, including journalism.
Can Senator Crossin's trip be justified as anything more than a farewell tour on the taxpayer tab? And more broadly, what would you do to strengthen faith in politics and political institutions?
PM: The truth is, Malcolm, I'm not familiar with detail of Senator Crossin's visit. In fact, the first time I discovered that Trish was in London was when I was talking to her the other day about developments in the Northern Territory. So I will let Senator Crossin speak for herself on this and I'm not across the detail.
One of the things that we sought to introduce during the Government's first term was a clear public declaration by Members of Parliament and Senators, when they travelled abroad, as to why they were travelling and to make it clear to the public the purposes of their travel and what they achieve as a result of their travel.
If that needs to be sharpened up, I'm all for sharpening it up further. I think the Australian public are just completely intolerant of people having a holiday at the taxpayers' expense. And they should be. This is serious business of the nation.
Our parliamentarians from time to time do need to travel. And let me give you one case in point through a parliamentary committee that I've recently been on. And it's the intelligence committee of the Parliament.
Dealing with complex questions of how you regulate the environment concerning freedom of information on the one hand with the necessary requirements of our intelligence agencies on the other, in the ongoing challenge of terrorism.
In dealing as they have done with both the British and Canadian Select Committees of the Parliaments on those questions, those are the sorts of engagements which are really important and shape legislation for the future. That's entirely justifiable.
But I think we need to move more in that direction than people going off for a jolly wherever that might happen.
JOURNALIST: Chris Uhlmann from the ABC. You've said in the past that you have an overwhelming preference that there be local democratic election for preselection ballots. There are five under way at the moment. It looks like the National Executive might step in.
But would you personally endorse a candidate who has never lived in the community in which they quantity to represent, has never had any connection with it until today has never expressed any interest in it and until last month wasn't a member of Labor Party?
PM: I thought it was a pretty interesting interview. And look, I don't know the person concerned. I've not met her before that I'm aware of.
Look, I think when you are going to vote for a person locally, one of the things they do look for is connection with the community.
They also look for a range of other things, the skills that you bring, and how you can actually take the cause of their community, their city or their State further in the national Parliament, they could be ministers one day or whatever.
I don't rule out people coming to a seat where they've not had a previous connection with. But I thought it was a pretty curious interview and I was a little surprised by it.
On the broader question of how we select candidates, I am out for the best possible people we can get into the Parliament of Australia.
It means therefore - I think I said this just after becoming Prime Minister - that wherever it is possible, local ballots should be held and people subjected to, frankly, the scrutiny of local party members who get to assess their relative merits or not.
If there's a time problem then you go to another mechanism.
More broadly across the Parliament, we really need to lift the standards of the Parliament in terms of the calibre of the people we get in in the future as well.
This is not a problem of any particular political party, it's systemic. I see this in many other democracies around the world. We need to encourage the brightest and best.
And frankly given the brutality of some of the preselection processes, both for the Liberals and ourselves, some of the brightest and the best don't necessarily have the hardened body armour to get through that in order to find themselves into the national Parliament.
So let's see how this lot turn out. My overwhelming preference remains local ballots.
JOURNALIST: Mark Riley from the Seven Network, Mr Rudd. You observed that electricity prices are too high. It's a pretty easy observation to make, but doing something about it has proved very difficult.
Is it your promise to Australian voters that you will reduce electricity prices and how will you go about doing that?
PM: Mark, I don't intend to make any rash promise here that I have no guarantee of delivering. That's quite wrong. Don't intend to do it.
What I have, however, been briefed on, by people who follow the electricity industry and its regulatory system, is that we have a problem with the way in which it's now being regulated.
How big or small any flow-through would be through a change in the regulatory arrangements, I do not know but I am flagging this as a key area of reform.
When I look at the fact that electricity prices in recent years have gone up, if you put the years together, by 80 or 90%.
And I think frankly when I go around, you know, small businesses in my own community, one of the things, all of them - doesn't matter what they're doing - raise with me is the cost of utilities.
And frankly as I said in my formal speech, the carbon price component of that is relatively small.
On this regulatory stuff and what States and Territories are doing for a bit of a gouge on the way through, I think that's where we have to have a very close look.
To be fair to them, if there is a problem in the regulatory system, which is nationally controlled, that's where the changes must occur.
That's why I put this at the top of the seven items of the agenda I ran through before. But I'm not going to make false promises. It's just wrong.
But I think there is a problem at mill on this. And I think we need to get to the bottom of it and bring about some changes.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Phillip Hudson from the Herald Sun. In your speech, you talked about the response to the global financial crisis.
And at the time you said that we would be having a temporary deficit which I think it's now looking like 8 or 9 years before, on the current forecasts, the budget gets back to surplus.
Was Labor wrong to put so much focus on returning to surplus and having that as the core economic message at the expense of promoting the other economic positives as you've tried to do today?
And I must ask, yesterday you sent out a picture of yourself with a Norman Gunston-style shaving cut. We're not used to seeing our Prime Ministers do such things and show such intimate pictures of themselves.
PM: Unless you take them yourselves, you mean.
JOURNALIST: It received quite mixed messages on social media. I guess I'm not Robinson Crusoe, to borrow one of your phrases, to ask him why did do you it?
PM: I think we all just need to loosen up a bit and have a joke from time to time. Ever cut yourself when you’ve been shaving? Good, okay. Well I'm a human, I shave, and from time to time it bleeds.
I was also about to walk out the door and do a press conference. So you either have a spontaneous combustion on camera, which is a real possibility, or fess up to what had just happen. I decided to fess up.
But listen, I don't intend to change my ways for any sense of political correctness out there.
That's just me. People will like it, people might loathe it but frankly that's just me. I don't intend to get into the restructuring of personality business. That's not my style.
I've been dealing with people on social media for a long, long time. I get lots of positive response, I get lots of negative response. That's nature of social media.
But I'd much rather be engaging people and not just on the high policy debates that we're having today but the normal stuff which happens in a person's life.
Guess what? Prime Ministers are human and occasionally they cut themselves shaving.
On the question of debt and deficit which you raised also, look, to be absolutely fair to those who have preceded me, I think it was very difficult to foreshadow after the events of 2008-09 that the global economic recovery would be so absolutely patchy, so slow and frankly then have a compounding factor of the Chinese economy coming off as well.
Now, when facts change, it's important that you adjust accordingly. That is the core lesson I think of public policy and certainly economic policy in particular.
Remember the great exchange with Maynard Keynes in the 1930s, I think just after the general period, when people asked ‘Why, Mr Keynes, have you changed your opinion?’ To which his immortal response was ‘My dear chap, when facts change, I change. My dear chap, what do you do when facts change?’ There's something in that. It's a basic wisdom.
And so when you're dealing with such a volatile set of global economic circumstances, as all Treasurers around the world have faced over the last five years or so since the global financial crisis, and new complicating factors in our region, because of what's going on in China, then I have full sympathy for Treasurers and central agencies in governments right around world trying to read the entrails of a very unusual set of economic circumstances.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, Shane Wright from the West Australian. Since the Budget, global interest rates have gone up and quite sharply on Australian Treasury yields and it's actually pushed up the interest bill for Australia by about a billion dollars over the forward estimates.
At the moment we're paying about 13 billion a year in interest, which is the equivalent of FBT and superannuation tax collections, to pay off the interest that's been garnered through the reaction to the global financial crisis.
Is it fair to future taxpayers to be saying ‘you're going to be paying another 13 billion next year and the year after and the year after in interest’, which is money that could've been better spent on infrastructure and services?
PM: Well, with respect, you haven't asked yourself the counter-factual and had the Government not intervened, with a temporary, targeted and timely national stimulus strategy as we did, what would've happened?
The economy would've gone into recession as those around the world did.
You would've also seen unemployment go through the roof as it did around the world and what are the consequences of that?
You would've had a decline in Government receipts; you would have a massive growth in Government outlays as we paid for things like the unemployment benefits bill for the nation, particularly if you went into double digit employment, which is entirely conceivable where we've been in previous recessions around the world.
In other words, had you taken the advice given to us by others, which is not to engage in a targeted stimulus strategy, then what no-one has ever answered is what would then have been the aggregate impact on overall government budget and our public debt levels?
No-one has ever actually analysed that. That's the counter-factual.
Then of course there's the second thing, which folk don't answer is, what would be the enduring social tragedy of having double digit unemployment?
I am old enough to remember when we did have double digit unemployment in the past. And we went through the recessions of the past.
This is a very unpleasant experience for families. People have been thrown out of work, often losing their homes. And as a result of that, kids growing up in households which produce the possibility of intergenerational unemployment.
I wasn't about - as Prime Minister at the time - to stand idly by and allow that to happen. I think we took exactly the right call.
And the IMF and other international institutions have concluded this was the most effective fiscal policy intervention in response not global financial crisis anywhere in the world. That's my answer to your question.
JOURNALIST: Mr Rudd, Kieran Gilbert from Sky News. If the Business Council of Australia says to you, we need to change the workplace laws, are you open to that? If you win the election, to change them or is this new cooperation within the framework of the Fair Work Act, is that set in stone?
PM: What I said quite clearly in my remarks before, is the Fair Work Act in the Government's view represents about the right balance given where we'd been before with WorkChoices.
What I went on to say further, and this has come out in some of the pretty interesting discussions with both BCA leaders and union leaders, that within the Fair Work Act, frankly, many of the mechanisms are not being best used to get the best productivity outcomes for a given firm or a given new project. That's what we want to work on.
I think the balance is about right. That's what I said before. So my response to the BCA, and I'm not saying to you anything publicly that I haven't said to them privately, is what can we do further within the Act? And let's look particularly at the future of greenfields projects and greenfields agreements to see if we can do better.
JOURNALIST: Lenore Taylor from Guardian Australia. On the carbon tax you said fairly clearly you're not going to shoot it but are you going to change it in some way, possibly by bringing forward the floating price?
And just in terms of your remarks on the surplus and returning to surplus, will you return to surplus along the, on the same time frame as outlined in the Budget and would it matter if that shifted a little bit to achieve what you're trying to achieve?
PM: On the surplus question, the Treasurer and I have both made statements about that and we're committed to returning the Budget to balance in 2015-16.
And on your first question, can I say, there is a thing called a Cabinet process and Cabinet continues to work through a range of policy matters. I'm sure part of that agenda deals with the future of the carbon price as well.
As you know, these are complex questions and people shouldn't be shooting from the hip. I don't intend to.
JOURNALIST: Mark Kenny, Mr Rudd, from The Age and Sydney Morning Herald. I might get into a bit of programmatic specificity if I can with you. On parental leave, Tony Abbott has a more generous scheme than the government currently has legislated.
I’m wondering, would you consider changes to that scheme, particularly to address the gap in superannuation payments that women would suffer under your scheme as compared to his?
PM: Well of course Mr Abbott's scheme is a huge slug on business. This comes from the so-called pro-business party: the Liberal Party.
And my private conversations with a number of large firms indicate they’re not looking forward to this Bill coming forward.
Second point I’d make is, guess what? My knowledge of Australian business is that they’re not a bunch of philanthropists.
They’ll say ‘oh this is a really good thing to do, we'll absorb all of that and you the consumers won't actually pick up any of the bill on the way through’. Well pigs might fly.
We know what’s going to happen, which is when this impost hits business, it will flow through to consumers. In other words, it's a hidden tax and it will therefore be a hidden increase in consumer prices. That's just the truth of it.
We spent a lot of time working through paid parental leave and as Prime Minister in 2010, we launched this. It was the right thing.
Look, it's not most generous scheme in the world. I know that. But against where we were before, where we had nothing, this represents a serious helping hand to parents when they are confronted with the initial challenges of having a new munchkin running around the living room.
So I think that given our budgetary circumstances, I think it's about right. We'd all wish to be Santa Claus and write out cheques. I'm not in that business because we have to maintain our fiscal discipline as well as attend to the core economic agenda that I outlined before.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, I'd like to ask a question about the asylum seeker debate. I've seen some projections where if current rates are continued, we'll have about 100,000 asylum seekers in the next term of the Government.
Do you believe that the boats can be stopped? If so, what is your policy to stop the boats? Also, could you update us on when the conference announced by SBY is actually going to be held?
And could you enlighten us as to what you might say to Iran, Afghanistan or Myanmar, some of the origin countries that might prevent some of these people leaving those jurisdictions?
PM: Thank you, Sid. This is an important question for Australia. And it's an important question which doesn't deserve glib answers from anybody, either our side of politics or Mr Abbott's side of politics.
I think the one step forward that we've got from the Indonesians is the recent statement which you pointed to, Sid. President Yudhoyono off his own bat said he will host a regional conference of ministers.
On the timing of that, I would expect it would happen within months. And possibly even shorter than that. But I leave that to the host country, because it's a matter for them to sort through.
It also depends on the availability of ministers from a range of other countries, source countries and transit countries.
But the importance of SBY's statement the other day was him saying very loudly and very clearly that he accepts that this is a problem for us all, not just a problem for Australia. That's an important step forward.
Second point I'd make is: I think one of the advantages to be achieved through such a conference is where a regional ministerial meeting could go, for example, with regional visa regimes. That is, visas and regimes which allow too easy access to various countries in the region.
I know there's work going on that but it's complex given the relationships which exist between some source countries and transit countries.
Also, of course, we have a review under way, as is publicly known, concerning the assessment procedures for asylum seekers in Australia itself as currently enforced by the Department of Immigration and the individual decision makers for individual cases.
The truth is Australia's acceptance rate for bona fide asylum seekers is very high by global standards. That’s the truth of it.
And the reason why the Government is having a close look at this is: is that because we have a unique set of asylum seekers coming here or is it because our assessment procedures need to be tightened up?
There are three practical areas of work that we're working on but I'm not about to respond to your question, Sid, with my own three-word slogan. I think the Australian people are too intelligent to tolerate that sort of thing from us or anybody else.
It's a real problem. It's a growing problem. I accept that. I recognise it. And we are required therefore to adjust our policy against these new facts. I've been signalling that quite plainly in recent times.
JOURNALIST: Paul Bongiorno, Ten News, Prime Minister. Tony Abbott has described your reforms on the way in which the parliamentary leader of the Labor Party would be elected as sham reforms. And if you do look a little closer at it, while caucus may overwhelmingly endorse your reforms, you do need the Labor Party to implement them, especially if you want the 40,000 members to vote.
We know at the 2010 national conference the unions wouldn't have a bar of it and it didn't get off the ground at all. How confident are you that this reform, dear to your heart, will in fact survive the election?
PM: Well, the first thing I would say to Mr Abbott is he should try it out. Open up the Liberal Party to a bit of democracy. There are not just a few closed darkened rooms in the Labor Party when it comes to preselection decisions or dare I say it so-called factional decisions. You talk to the Liberals at Parliament house, they're always talking about the left, the right, the right and the left, the left right out and the rest.
So I think it is good for all modern political parties to throw the doors open and democratise their procedures. There's nothing to be feared from anyone who aspires to the leadership, of my party or Mr Abbott's party, to put themselves before a much wider audience which comes from the broad community as well.
My second point is that, as I said the other day, Paul, this will matter will go to a certainly meeting of the Parliamentary Labor Party on 22nd of July.
I've put forward my arguments for it. I'm sure there’s going to be a robust discussion, as there was a robust discussion the other day in the meeting of the full ministry, which went on for, from memory, about three hours.
So the Labor Party takes these rule changes seriously but I’ve got to say this is the pathway to the future. This is what we’ve got to do. The pathway for Labor in the future is to represent a much broader based political party than perhaps we have in the past.
As Prime Minister, I see part of my responsibilities as being a Prime Minister for those, for example, who cannot work through disability. A Prime Minister for those who can't get a job and they want to, the unemployed.
I see myself as a Prime Minister for knows who are in employment and standing up for fair pay and conditions. I also see myself as a Prime Minister for those who choose to leave paid employment and invest in their own businesses and grow their own businesses to provide employment for others.
This is therefore a broad church and I'm saying the Australian Labor Party should be as comfortable for people who've decided to go out there and grow their own business as for people who've been traditionally members of the Australian trade union movement. That's the signal I'm sending across the country and to the members of the party in particular.
JOURNALIST: Michelle Grattan from the Conversation. Mr Rudd, just to take a little further your reform package, some have suggested that your 75 per cent trigger point for the leadership to be reviewed is too high for the party in opposition.
Are you willing to be at all flexible on the package you have put forward and do you think there is an argument for a different level, say 50 per cent, in opposition? That is a distinction, on this question, between a Prime Minister and an Opposition Leader.
PM: I think the core reason for this reform, the core reason for this reform, is so that the Australian people, when they vote for a Prime Minister, they get that Prime Minister. And they know that Prime Minister is going to be there for that term of the Parliament.
Secondly, in terms of another reason why this reform is necessary, as I said before, it's time for the Australian Labor Party to throw the windows of the show open and let a bit of fresh air in. I think that is not going to do anyone any harm in terms of new people, new members from a vast array of different backgrounds.
Thirdly, in terms of the dynamics of opposition, Michelle, as I said in my introductory press conference the other night, in opposition that is a separate conversation, I think, for Caucus colleagues. I'm more concerned, frankly, about what happens in Government and I'm pretty relaxed about that but at the same time, we've got to make sure that we have leadership predictability.
The core thing for this reform is to make sure that we have a clear answer to the Australian public when they say ‘if we vote for this person, will they be our Prime Minister after the election if he or she is elected as Prime Minister?’ That's what's necessary. We've had a difficult period in recent years on this. That's the answer which needs to be given.
As I said in the press conference the other day, on the question of if we are in a period of opposition, I'm open to a discussion with the colleagues about that. That is for me is a secondary concern.
JOURNALIST: Paul Osborne from Australian Associated Press. I just have a double-barrelled question. One is: the jobless rate obviously went up today to 5.7 per cent. In Tasmania it's 8.9. Do you have any specific plans to address the very low level of unemployment assistance, which is about $35 a day for a single unemployed person?
And secondly, on a completely separate matter, we hear from our PNG correspondent that you're going to PNG next week. What's your agenda for that trip?
PM: We are putting out a statement later on this afternoon. I’m going to PNG. I will be in Cairns just before then, I'm talking about Sunday. I've been speaking to Prime Minister O'Neill. It is important that I use this period to speak with our regional political leaders.
I've met with the President of East Timor just a few days ago. About a week or so ago, I met with the President of Indonesia. I think it's important I spend some time with Prime Minister O'Neill.
There are two big questions on the agenda with PNG at a bilateral level. Number one is the future of their massive new gas project. As you know, there is significant Australian equity in that project.
Number two, the Prime Minister has also raised with me, on the telephone, concerns that he has about the law and order challenge in a number of PNG's major cities, and so I want to deal with that.
So if we can reach an arrangement whereby we can cooperate better with PNG to lift the levels of security on the streets of the bigger cities, then I think that going to help Australian investors, the Australian business community, as well as the good people of PNG.
The third thing he raised with me, by the way, is about the state of PNG's hospitals. Through the aid program, I remember, in my previous incarnation, working on a plan to get basic pharmaceuticals and medical supplies out to district health clinics right across remote PNG.
That is being rolled out and has been a very effective program. In the so-called referral hospitals within PNG, and there is about six or seven of them, frankly we have a real problem.
Moresby's hospital is on the improve, however if we look at places like, I think, Lae and Madang, there is a lot of work to be done.
So what we’re going to try and look at is how we, through the aid program, work at hospital management teams which can be drawn from Australian experience and expertise, to harness the sort of nursing staff and sort of medical staff and equipment into properly a functioning major referral hospitals.
And your earlier question I have now lost track of.
JOURNALIST: The earlier question was about unemployment support.
PM: On unemployment, and, yes, I'm conscious of the fact that we have a very large level of unemployment in Tasmania and I look forward to spending some time with the Premier soon on what we can do further in that State.
I've mentioned before also the increase in unemployment, I think, worryingly in my own State of Queensland.
I feel that on the ground as I walk around my own community, in my electorate, talking to people who are concerned about their job security, and it is affecting business confidence and frankly it's flowing through in terms of the ability of small businesses to keep their doors open in some sectors.
On the question of unemployment benefits, can I say, that question along with others that have been floated with me, including supporting parents payments will be the subject of further discussion by the Cabinet.
I don't want to make false promises and create expectations which can't be realised, but obviously we as a government are concerned about these genuine social challenges, and we will be doing what we can in these areas. Thank you very much.
[ENDS] 


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED
I am, without apology, an optimist about our nation’s future.
Our national strengths are formidable.
Our weaknesses, compared with the rest of the world, are few.
And, if our policy settings are right, the challenges we face for the future are entirely manageable.
My optimism therefore is not based on some sort of feel-good factor.
Instead it is based on a cold, hard analysis of the facts – including our ability to manage change when change is necessary.
And the core fact is this: Australia is seen around the world as one of the strongest economies, one of the most stable societies, as well as a nation underpinned by a robust national security.
For these reasons, it is just plain wrong for anybody in our national political debate to be talking Australia down.
Of course there are things we need to reform.
The process of reform is never-ending.
But that is different to a daily diatribe of negative politics whose single objective is to cause the Australian people to feel that our national economy and our national security is on the verge of falling apart – if not now, then certainly by next Thursday afternoon.
Mr Abbott is a formidable politician.
He is the most conservative politician to become leader of the Liberal Party in its history.
He is particularly formidable in the art of negative politics.
 But a 100 per cent diet of negative politics is bad for our nation.
It is bad for national confidence.
And the truth is that it is a lazy substitute for the hard work that is needed to develop, argue and implement real policies that will change Australia for the better.
That is why Mr Abbott has so far publicly stated that he does not want to face the public scrutiny of an economic policy debate here at the National Press Club of Australia.
Today’s debate was to be about the economy.
My core argument to you today is that given the new economic challenges that Australia is now facing, what the Australian people now want to see is a debate about a clear, positive economic policy direction for their future.
Given the significant and recent decline in our terms of trade, a critical influence on jobs and on the living standards of our people, substantive economic policy debate is no longer just an option for our nation.
It has now become a necessity.
Because if we make the wrong decisions now – we will be living with those decisions for the decade ahead.
So how do we best define this core new economic challenge for the nation?
And how do we best define the most appropriate policy response to this challenge?
When I was first elected Leader of the Opposition, I argued long and hard that Australia had to prepare for the day when the resources boom was over.
You will remember I was ridiculed by then Treasurer Peter Costello for even asking the question – as if it reflected a lack of economic patriotism.
The truth is in 2013 – the China resources boom is over.
While the export of resource and commodity volumes are up, the prices we receive for them have now fallen almost 25 per cent since their peak and may well fall further.
This is reflected in our declining terms of trade from the historic highs we achieved only a year or so ago.
At their peak, our terms of trade were more than 60 per cent higher than their average across the 20th century.
Over the course of the boom beginning in 2002-03, these record terms of trade have delivered Australia around a 15 per cent boost in our national income.
Our producers have responded fantastically to these international price signals and have brought about arguably the single greatest investment phase in our history.
But now that investment phase is slowing.
Right now, we find ourselves at a cross-over point for our national economy.
A transition from an investment-intensive phase in our minerals and energy sector which has understandably pulled resources away from other sectors of the economy.
And a transition to a new phase of investment in other sectors of the economy, including the traded sector, that will now also be advantaged by a lower dollar.
Managing this economic transition is now a core task of Australian economic policy.
Critical for jobs. Critical for infrastructure.
When I was elected Prime Minister in 2007 I said the best policy response to any future change in our economic circumstances was to lift our national productivity.
I have never changed my view.
We then took action by radically increasing investment in human capital (early childhood education, school standards, school infrastructure and school funding and uncapping university places); a radical new investment in economic infrastructure (road, rail, ports and for the first time urban transport and the NBN) and a third program of regulatory harmonisation between the Commonwealth and the states.
Nine months into office, while implementing these productivity based reforms, we, together with the rest of the world, were hit by the GFC.
This was no small thing.
This was the largest financial and economic crisis faced by the international economy since the Great Depression three quarters of a century before.
We continued to implement our productivity reform agenda.
But our core economic priority, understandably, became national economic survival as we watched bank collapses around the world, depositors lose their savings and economies crash into recession with massive job losses.
As you know, here in Australia, we deployed a national economic stimulus strategy, timely targeted and temporary, which helped keep Australia out of recession, kept the economy growing, and kept unemployment with a five in front of it – one of the lowest levels in the world.
And we did so with lower levels of debt and deficit than practically all the major advanced economies in the world.
These were our core preoccupations from 2008 to 2010.
In early 2010 with the economy stabilising, as Prime Minister I returned to the theme of national productivity growth.
In January 2010, drawing on the third intergenerational report “Australia to 2050: Future Challenges”; I outlined Australia’s triple dilemma of an aging population; static to declining workforce participation rates; and slowing multi-factor productivity growth.
Just to recap: in 2010 one in seven Australians were over the age of 65, whereas by 2050 that ratio will fall to one in four.
This aging of the population is also expected to reduce the workforce participation rate from around 65 per cent to around 60 per cent by mid-century.
And third, average labour productivity growth, which had risen to 2.1 per cent per annum during the 1990s, had fallen to 1.4 per cent in the decade just past, although it has risen to 1.6 per cent over the year to March.
Three years later, the three Ps (population, workforce participation and productivity) continue as the core economic agenda for the future.
However in prosecuting this agenda, we now face the new global and national economic circumstances which I outlined earlier, demanding that we implement a new national competitiveness agenda with a new sense of national urgency.
These global factors frame the new economic challenge that Australia faces today: how to protect our jobs and living standards given that global growth is sluggish and now the Chinese resources is slowing.
I am optimistic that we can rise to this new challenge with a clear-cut policy direction that puts productivity first, driven by a new sense of partnership between government, business and unions.
My confidence in rising to this challenge is underpinned by our economic fundamentals which we have kept strong, despite the pressures of the Global Financial Crisis.
If anyone seriously doubts this, they should ask why we were one of the few countries in the world to have a triple-A credit rating with a stable outlook from all the ratings agencies that analyse minutely Australia’s and every other country’s debt and deficit profile.
But strong macroeconomic fundamentals are not sufficient themselves to meet the urgency of the new challenge that now confronts us.
The Government will maintain a prudent approach to fiscal policy, returning the budget to surplus across the economic cycle – and as the Treasurer has recently confirmed. We will continue with our plan to return the budget to balance in the medium term.
But other economic reforms (what the economists call microeconomic reform) must also be prosecuted with a new urgency.
Because the China resources boom is coming off, Australia’s core economic strategy for the future must be one which diversifies our economy, by creating more jobs in manufacturing, food production, infrastructure, construction, and our many other services industries, rather than having all our eggs in just one basket – the resources and energy sector.
Relying on the lower dollar alone to boost competitiveness is insufficient for the great economic task that lies ahead.
That is why Australia must embrace today a new national competitiveness agenda.
If we fail to do so, in the years ahead there is a danger that Australia will begin to price itself out of international business.
The core of this new national competitiveness agenda must be a common agreement among us all that we must lift our annual productivity growth rate to 2 per cent or better for the future.
Our population should continue to be supported by a strong migration policy designed to mitigate the effects of our ageing population.
Our workforce participation policy must continue to embrace positive reforms in paid parental leave, flexible forms of childcare, as well as increased female participation in the workforce in order to keep our participation rate as high as possible.
But of the three P’s, our most critical task remains lifting our national productivity growth rate on the back of a new national competitiveness agenda.
Over the last two weeks I have met now on four occasions with the Business Council of Australia and the Australian Council of Trade Unions.
I have done so because I have never believed in class warfare.
I have done so because I have always believed that Australia at its best is both a nation of equity and opportunity – a nation that values enterprise, because it is enterprise that creates the jobs, as well as being a nation that values a fair go for all.
The truth is if we are to drive a new national competitiveness agenda we need to have government, business and unions working as much as possible together – pushing in the same strategic policy direction for the overall wellbeing of our national economy.
I do not have a pie in the sky attitude to all this.
There will always be disagreements.
That is normal in a market economy.
And we all have a huge interest in growing the size of the national economic pie together.
The discussions I have had in the last couple of weeks with both business and the unions have been useful in elaborating the possible content of a new national competitiveness agenda for Australia.
Thus far we have agreed on seven broad areas of necessary policy work together.
Number one: Domestic electricity price regulation in Australia, and the impact of the current carbon price as well as the future availability of competitively priced domestic gas supplies are high on the agenda.
Australian electricity prices are too high by global standards.
This affects the competitiveness of all firms large and small. Of course it also affects individual consumers.
But before you all start reaching for your revolver on the carbon price, let’s be rational about this: the carbon price at present contributes less than 10 per cent to national electricity prices.
The primary reason for the hike in electricity prices appears to be the current system of national electricity regulation which has allowed excessive rates of return for publicly-owned transmission and distribution utilities which have become cash cows for various state and territory governments.
Furthermore, reforms are needed for the supply of competitively priced gas for Australian businesses and households.
Number two: We must continue to examine any unintended rigidities arising in the labour market.
And before anyone gets too excited here, let me record as a fact that under the Fair Work Act, labour productivity in the market sector is running at nearly 2 per cent per annum – one and a half times the pace during the WorkChoices era.
Wage growth has been moderate —the Wage Price Index has grown 3.2 per cent through the year.
Industrial disputes are low – under Fair Work the rate of industrial disputes is around one third the rate in terms of days lost compared to under the Howard Government.
The Government believes the Fair Work Act represents a reasonable balance for the future.
The Government nonetheless believes some businesses are not making the most effective use of the Act to drive the productivity outcomes that they need for the future of their businesses.
What I have discussed with the BCA, the ACTU and Minister Shorten is how we can harness a greater spirit and practice of industrial cooperation to produce better outcomes for us all. Nobody has an interest in a business going bust.
A good place to start could be in respect of large greenfields projects where large numbers of Australians are employed and which represent significant levels of investment.
These projects reflect to the world the broader industrial, regulatory, and investment circumstances existing in this country – we need to make them work, and work well.
Number three: Business productivity.
The BCA itself has recently reported on problems in Australian business productivity, competent project management as well as the most effective use of capital by management.
The future of the productivity agenda therefore does not in any way lie exclusively with the labour market.
In fact some bad industrial outcomes for some major projects can be the result of bad management decisions rather than union hostility.
Business might say this is exclusively a problem for business.
I would argue, as does the BCA, that this is also a problem for the nation.
I am also concerned that if you went through our business elites, you would not find a whole lot of the top 25 executives in each of our top 100 firms who have spent any of their career time serving in Asia – the engine driver of the global economy through until mid-century.
Remember, this is the Asian Century.
The truth is Australia is much under-done in Asia beyond the resource and energy sector.
Indonesia is a classic example – an economy which by 2050 is on track to become the fourth largest economy in the world after China, India and the United States.
But at present, Indonesia does not fall within our top 10 trading partners or our top 20 investment destinations.
This is a problem of Australian enterprise. Not a problem created by Australian unions.
Number four: We need a new approach to the regulatory impost on business from all levels of government.
This particularly applies to multiple and conflicting environmental assessment requirements for state and federal governments.
Surely it lies within our wit and wisdom to begin by integrating the assessment procedures and reports at present separately mandated by the Commonwealth and the states.
Surely we should aim at having one single integrated assessment system, even if we continue to have two different decision points.
An integrated assessment system removes so much of the regulatory burden faced by businesses when trying to get a project off the ground.
I have already discussed this with Premier O’Farrell in particular and I want to take this discussion further. 
Number five: Education, skills and training.
Our national objective must be to build the best educated, best trained, best skilled workforce anywhere in the world.
Progress has been made.
We now have universal pre-school education supervised by teachers for a minimum of 15 hours a week emphasising pre literacy, pre-numeracy skills.
We now have NAPLAN to make publicly transparent the literacy and numeracy performance of all schools.
The Government’s Better Schools policy plans to invest a further $10 billion over the next six years to lift school standards and education outcomes through transparent school performance plans.
We have uncapped university places for Australian students so that we now have 190,000 more kids at university than five years ago.
We do, however, need to do more with vocational education and training, particularly given the recent withdrawal of effort by many of the states.
Number six: Infrastructure.
Infrastructure Australia is doing great work.
For the first time in the nation’s history, a national infrastructure priority list has been developed on the basis of a rigorous cost-benefit analysis.
Major projects are underway across road, rail and ports and urban transport.
More projects should be underway such as the Cross-River Rail project in Brisbane.
The NBN is being rolled out – the new infrastructure of the 21st century which of itself becomes a massive productivity driver for firms.
We do however need to embrace new forms of infrastructure financing and this forms part of an important agenda of work.
Number seven: We must improve the operating environment for small business in this country.
And we want to work with the Council of Small Business of Australia to achieve this.
This involves access to capital.
It also involves other productivity drivers such as the effective take up of the NBN.
As Prime Minister I am passionate about the future of small business.
During the course of next week, key cabinet ministers will sit down again with the BCA and business groups, and with the ACTU to hammer out agendas of work in these areas (COSBOA in the case of small business) to work out where to go next with each of these agendas.
I say again - as Prime Minister I want to bring the nation together in this new national competitiveness agenda.
It is the only way it will work.
Mr Abbott’s alternative economic agenda
 I have outlined the Government’s definition of Australia’s core economic challenge; to manage the economic transition that lies ahead by maintaining macroeconomic stability and at the same time implementing a new national competitiveness agenda.
You might well ask, at least in his absence, what Mr Abbott’s alternative economic diagnosis is.
And based on that diagnosis, what his alternative policy prescription for the national economy is.
Mr Abbott says that Australia’s core economic problem is that we are suffering from a debt and deficit crisis.
He said: ‘… there is now a budget emergency.’ (Budget Reply speech, 16 May 2013).
Mr Abbott, is a formidable politician – he is the nation’s most formidable exponent of negative politics, and negative politics above all designed to induce feelings of worry, anxiety and fear in the community.
He and the Liberal Party have concluded that fear is a far better political bet than engaging on a debate on the facts.
Which is why once again Mr Abbott refused to debate the economic facts here today.
Fact one: Despite Mr Abbott saying every day the economy is in crisis, since we have been in office the Australian economy has in fact grown by 14 per cent.
Whereas over the same period of time the economies of the United Kingdom, France and Japan have actually shrunk in size.
And those of Germany and the United States have only grown about one fifth the rate of the Australian economy.
While Canada has grown by around half our rate.
Fact two: Australia has one of the lowest levels of government debt as a percentage of our economy in the OECD.
Fact three: Australian government debt per capita is one of the lowest in the OECD.
 Fact four: Australia’s budget deficit as a proportion of the size of our economy is also one of the lowest in the OECD.
Fact five: Australia’s unemployment rate is lower than almost every major advanced economy.
So this is the factual economic report card for Australia that Mr Abbott does not want to debate today.
Let’s go to debt and deficit levels in particular – because this is what Mr Abbott has banged on about for three years now, and it will dominate Mr Abbott’s negative message for the election campaign.
Our debt level is scheduled to peak at 11.4 per cent of the size of our economy.
Of course we should always be concerned if we have a debt.
And we should always repay our debts responsibly.
But Australia has one of the lowest debt levels in the world.
Because Mr Abbott’s exaggerated claims on debt and deficit are based on a falsehood the whole house of cards he has constructed against the Government’s economic credentials, resting on the flimsy foundation of his debt and deficit attack, comes tumbling down.
Mr Abbott’s economic policy for the future is even worse.
His prescription is to implement a slash and burn austerity drive across the nation.
Well we have seen how that works in Queensland under Campbell Newman where business and consumer confidence has been shaken by the sacking of thousands of people, and the shrinking of critical government services.
We have also seen the impact of austerity drives by conservative governments in the United Kingdom which nearly produced a double dip recession, and has continued to plague growth.
Just this year, the United Kingdom recorded the largest quarterly decline in household living standards in a generation.
And please note this core fact: the British economy today is smaller than it was back in 2008.
In summary, Mr Abbott just doesn’t understand economics.
Don’t take my word for it. That is what former Treasurer Peter Costello said about Mr Abbott.
Today, I wanted to debate the future of our economy.
Mr Abbott’s absence has made such a debate impossible.
Therefore, whenever you hear Mr Abbott, Mr Hockey, Mr Robb or anyone else try and run the lines on an Australian debt and deficit crisis, remember this was the day for Mr Abbott to defend his case.
Instead, Mr Abbott decided to cut and run.
Run away from the facts.
But keep pumping out the fear.
In Mr Abbott’s absence, what I have done today is outline our framework for tackling Australia’s future economic challenges.
Australia is now an economy in transition.
A transition from the previous decade of the China resources boom.
To the decade ahead where we must now diversify our economy so that we don’t have all our eggs in one basket.
The challenge for the Australian Government is to accelerate a new national competitiveness agenda that boosts our long term productivity growth.
We need to aim for a productivity number with a “2” in front of it.
And to get there we need to bring the nation together, not pull it apart.
Australian Labor Governments know how to manage the great transitions in our economy.
We did it with the Hawke and Keating governments when they transitioned Australia from the old, closed, post-war economy to the new internationalised economy that sets us up for the future – producing 22 years of sustained economic growth and an underlying inflation rate of 2.5 per cent – a world record.
We did it again under this government when we transitioned Australia through what Paul Keating recently and eloquently described to me as the “valley of death” of the 2008-09 Great Global Recession.
And I believe we can transition Australia again, capturing the gains of the Asian Century while diversifying the Australian economy so that in the future we have all sectors, all our cities and our regional centres lifting their economic performance.
Australian Labor Governments manage transitions.
We sketch the future.
We harness the energy and ambition of our people.
And as the people’s government, we put policy to work to put the changes in place that best secures our future.
Graphs
Graph 1 - Cumulative Economic Growth under the Labor Government - growth since December quarter 2007
 Graph 1  [PDF 638kB]
Graph showing cumulative economic growth since December quarter 2007
Graph 2 - Government Net Debt of Selected OECD Countries - as a percentage of the size of the economy, as at 2012
 Graph 2  [PDF 661kB]
Graph showing Government Net Debt of selected OECD Countries
Graph 3 - Government Net Debt Per Capita
 Graph 3  [PDF 605kB]
Graph showing Government Net Debt Per Capita
Graph 4 - Comparison of Budget Balances for Selected Economies - calendar years 2012-18
 Graph 4  [PDF 646kB]
Graph of Comparison of Budget Balances for Selected Economies - calendar years 2012-18
Graph 5 - Unemployment Rates for Selected Economies
 Graph 5  [PDF 645kB]
Graph of Unemployment Rates for selected Economies
[ENDS] 
Graphs are available National Library Pandora Archive:
http://pandora.nla.gov.au/pan/79983/20130830-1433/www.pm.gov.au/press-o…


I don’t know about the rest of you, and I know I have no official capacity to this, but I think all Australians would like today to be declared Ashton Agar Day.
This is a young man who’s just given such absolute delight to every Australian overnight, whether you're a cricket fan or not.
The look of enthusiasm on this young man’s face was enough to put a spring in the step of everyone this morning right across the country.
So Ashton, well done mate, the country’s proud of you and there’s no pressure, but we expect this to be repeated every test match!
Thank you to the folk at Mary Ryan’s for hosting today’s launch.
It’s an old truism that a town isn’t a real town without a bookstore.
Certainly in my local community on Brisbane’s Southside, as a family we have spent a lot of time over a lot of years sipping coffees at our local bookstore Riverbend – in fact I’ll be there this evening.
I believe in books.
I believe in the power of ideas.
I believe in the importance of debating ideas.
The American novelist and essayist William Styron once said that “a good book should leave you ... slightly exhausted at the end”.
By that measure, Nick Cater’s The Lucky Culture is a very good book indeed.
Good enough, apparently, to warrant a launch in every capital city and quite a few regional population centres.
In fact, this launch is the literary equivalent of Dame Nellie Melba’s farewells – they never seem to stop.
I’m not sure what the statute of limitations on launches is.
Everyone will eventually have read his book because everyone - eventually - will have launched it somewhere.
But Nick, I don’t quite know how the locals will take to your description of the “parched nature strips of twenty-first century suburban Brisbane”, reflecting the “arid intellectual climate in which mankind [is] no longer master of its destiny”.
Sounds a little bit like southern intellectual snobbery to me Nick.
But then, Nick himself, in the prologue to The Lucky Culture, has encouraged robust feedback on his writing.
There’s even a blogspot for the purpose.
So here is my humble contribution to the blog.
There’s no denying that The Lucky Culture is an entertaining read.
By turns both amusing and provoking.
There is the occasional jolt of recognition.
A barb that wounds. A caught reflection that reveals one’s less photogenic side – Norman Gunston eat your heart out.
The Labor Party certainly does not escape criticism.
Nor should it.
But there are also many moments in the reading of The Lucky Culture when the author’s aggrieved tone and generalisations sit oddly with the facts.
It’s the kind of book that seems imbued with a sense of disappointment.
As if written by someone rudely woken from a dream.
Nick Cater arrived in Australia in 1989 to a land he perceived as free from class distinctions.
An egalitarian land free from bombast, where pretentions were sorted out quick-smart.
A place where you might be better off than someone else, without ever feeling you were therefore somehow better than someone else.
It’s an egalitarianism that the author glimpsed from his taxi window, driving from the airport to the city on his first day as a new chum.
An egalitarianism he traces back to the very foundations of the nation.
Or at least its colonial foundations, because in the book, Indigenous Australia seems curiously invisible, its influence on our national character almost negligible.
So much so that he announces in his prologue that when he uses the term “settled” Australia, it should be regarded as a “value-neutral” reference to the country post 1788.
Nick, much of the troubled part of our history since 1788 has been because we refused to come to terms with the fact that form most of our settled history, we have treated our Aboriginal brothers and sisters with contempt.
And through a painful national process of reconciliation, we are finally seeking to put wrongs to rights in this most elemental exercise of egalitarianism.
Nick Cater’s central grievance is that this sturdy, no-bulldust egalitarianism has given way, over recent years, to a new social class, a new elite.
A class of university-over-educated men and women who, for the first time in our history, don’t just feel better off than their fellows, but better full-stop.
And who think they are entitled to look down on those who do not share their world view.
For the first time, Nick asserts, snobbery has become part of our national character.
But I wonder if perhaps the Australia which Nick Cater glimpsed on that first taxi ride from the airport, back in 1989, a view obviously formed by his reading of D H Lawrence was in fact a realistic glimpse.
Yes, by world standards we have indeed always been a classless society.
More classless certainly than the England from which Nick Cater fled.
And the England from which my forebear was much less ceremoniously exported in 1790.
And unlike Nick, without having to pay his fare.
But this book’s rather romantic view of convicts working in harmony with their jailors and jolly migrants making their unimpeded way from fruit-picker to millionaire, must surely be tempered just a little by social and economic reality.
And by political movements such as our own which have sought to reform that reality for the betterment of those brought up on the wrong side of the tracks.
Ponder for a moment the following list.
Port Arthur.
Sarah Island.
Moreton Bay.
The Parramatta Female Factory.
Myall Creek.
Lambing Flat.
The Eureka Stockade.
Brisbane’s Bread and Blood riots.
The 1890 Maritime Strike.
The 1891 Shearer’s Strike.
The 1917 food riots.
The New Guard.
Wave Hill.
Chapters in the history of our egalitarian society that are surely worth at least a footnote on what Geoffrey Blainey, has called our national ‘balance sheet’.
Curiously, the author Nick Cater does invoke to support his thesis of a classless past is Henry Handel Richardson.
But surely if The Getting of Wisdom shows anything it is that snobbery was alive and well, and rolling its eyes in derision, in 1910 Australia.
Ladies and gentlemen, as a library-card-carrying member of the club Nick Cater despises in this book, I crave a moment for self-defence.
I’m a positive person. An optimist.
I believe this nation’s best days lie ahead not behind.
The reforms Nick excoriates in The Lucky Culture are ones that I believe have made us a more egalitarian place.
Certainly they have transformed my life and my prospects.
Foremost among these reforms, a fine education – first at a great government school.
Followed by a quality tertiary education at a great public university.
Both the beneficiaries of Labor Government reforms by the man Nick Cater seems to criticise the most – E.G Whitlam.
At high school our first proper library for my final year.
At university, free access and a living allowance for kids like me whose mothers had scrimped and saved with the remote hope that her youngest kid might one day benefit from a university education.
Nick, these were deeply egalitarian reforms.
And they replaced a system infinitely less accessible to rural working class kids like me.
Education reform.
Law reform.
Cultural reform.
By the time I left school it was barely a decade since the lifting of the marriage bar that required women public servants to resign their jobs if they married.
My school-leaving coincided with the passage of the Racial Discrimination Act.
With Gough Whitlam trickling a handful of sand into the palm of Vincent Lingiari.
Acts and moments that have strengthened our sense of egalitarianism, not weakened them.
I speak of our real, our lived, our flesh and blood, egalitarianism.
And Nick, one that gave this young Australian an example of equality of opportunity and its capacity to transform lives.
One that has a little less of Nick Cater’s beloved Mick Dundee about it, perhaps.
But one that may be truer to who we are as a people.
Whether we live in the bush or the city.
Whether we are a plumber or a paediatrician or a prime minister.
As for our national capacity to prick the balloon of self-importance of our political elites, we don’t need to look much further than the television series The Hollowmen.
I’ve wanted to go to Antarctica for ages.
But ever since the The Hollowmen episode that made a Prime Ministerial trip to Antarctica as a perfect media diversion, I’ve been too petrified to even think of it.
This is a remorseless satire on the very elites Nick Cater insists are taking over our nation, shutting down our debates and stifling our opinions.
Thankfully, we can apparently still openly mock these elites on prime-time television.
And write freely about them, in books like this one.
It’s a freedom I am glad of.
Whatever Nick Cater may suggest, none of us wants to have our world view indulged and endorsed by everything we read.
We need polemics like The Lucky Culture to prick us, to goad us.
Ladies and gentlemen, it is a brave author who includes the word “Lucky” in his title.
The word instantly evokes, as I am sure it intends to, Donald Horne’s mid-60s clarion call, The Lucky Country.
A call to shake off the self-satisfied reverie Horne believed had held back Australia’s intellectual and artistic development.
A call to harness our great qualities, and make of these a great nation.
I’ve always been of the view that in this country we must make our own luck.
This in fact was the cultural point of my address to the National Press Club yesterday.
We once thought we were lucky to ride on the sheep’s back.
Then we thought we were lucky to be able to dig anything out of the ground that mother nature had fortunately put there.
The truth is this all took hard work.
As does out next challenge.
To manage the transition from our current economy and the end of the China resources boom, to our future economy which diversifies our economic base to build the new industries of tomorrow.
Implementing a new national competitiveness agenda for Australia is not about luck.
It is about hard work.
Hard work to tap new domestic gas fields to lower our energy prices.
Hard work to get the best productivity outcomes under the Fair Work Act.
Hard work to get the best entrepreneurial leadership to create the new businesses of the future, and the new global markets they will serve.
Hard work to protect the environment, but also, to streamline assessment processes so that we get the best outcomes for both the economy and the environment.
Hard work to create the best educated workforce in the world.
That’s why I'm catching up with Campbell Newman today.
I mean to ask Campbell Newman to sign on to the Better Schools Plan for Australia, to invest another $3.8 billion into the schools of Queensland and to Queensland schoolkids.
Hard work to build world-class infrastructure that reduces our tyranny of distance.
Again that’s why I'm meeting Premier Campbell Newman today.
Again I’ll be asking Premier Campbell Newman to sign onto, to honour his original agreement to co-fund and co-invest in the Brisbane Cross-River Rail infrastructure for the future.
And let me tell you, there is nothing more egalitarian than hard work.
It is not the stuff of elites.
It is the stuff that offers opportunity and reward for all.
We’ve come through economic challenges that have brought older, less agile nations to their knees.
We are engaging in our region as never before.
As one of the top dozen economies in the world and an active contributor to global affairs, we are seated at the important tables, for the big conversations.
Next year, this fair city hosts G20 – the world’s foremost economic collaboration forum.
Donald Horne wouldn’t recognise the Australia I see when I’m out and about every day.
My concern is that maybe Nick doesn’t either.
Maybe we just see and experience different realities within the same country which we both love.
So let’s keep the dialogue open, fresh and robust.
Nick has certainly done that in his book.
I’ve wanted to accord him the respect of doing the same today.
So thank you to Nick and to HarperCollins for the opportunity to be a part of what is turning into more of a festival of book launches rather than a single event.
But let us above all celebrate the power of ideas, and the debate of ideas in shaping our nation’s future.
[ENDS] 


Subject(s): Labor Party reforms; Asylum seekers
PM: The Australian parliamentary Labor Party has today met here at the Balmain Town Hall.
Today, the Australian parliamentary Labor Party has made more history in Balmain.
Today, the Australian parliamentary Labor Party has decided to democratise the party for the future.
The party has decided also to make sure that the PM who the people elect in the future will be the Prime Minister the people get in the future.
The Australian Labor Party has been meeting in this hall for the last 120 years, in fact the Australian Labor Party has been meeting in halls like this around Australia for the last 120 years.
Today, the ALP has passed one of its most significant reforms to the party in recent history.
This reform brings us into line with the sorts of models which have been embraced in the United Kingdom, Canada and the United States.
These are reforms which will be welcomed by our 44,000 rank and file members across the nation.
Each of our members now gets to have a say, a real say in the future leadership of our party.
Decisions can no longer simply be made by a factional few.
But these reforms also extend beyond party lines, they go to the Australian public itself.
The Australian public now have certainty. Australians demand to know that the Prime Minister they elect is the Prime Minister they get and that is underlined by these reforms.
The changes that we have passed will see the federal parliamentary Labor Party leader elected jointly by the party membership and the members of the FPLP on the following proportional basis: votes by the party membership is weighted at 50 per cent and votes by the federal parliamentary Labor Party weighted also at 50 per cent.
An election for leader shall automatically occur following an election where the ALP does not form government.
An election for leader can be called by the Caucus Secretary after any of the following events: upon the resignation of the leader, at the request of the leader, or at least 75 per cent of the members of the federal parliamentary Labor Party sign a petition requesting that an election for a new leader be held on the grounds that the current leader has brought the party into disrepute.
These changes were also if we were to continue to be the party of ideas, reform and change, as well as the party of fearless debate.
We have also, in our meeting today, accepted three sets of amendments moved by myself and seconded by Anthony Albanese, the Deputy Prime Minister.
And that is that the rule, in terms of the Leader of the Opposition, if the party doesn't form government, under those circumstances, the leader would be open to a future ballot if there was a petition of 60 per cent of the members of the federal parliamentary party rather than 75 per cent as is the case for the party when we are in government and the leader is Prime Minister.
The second procedural motion that was put forward by myself and the deputy leader relates to the closing of the day of nominations for the election of a leader and the third is that in the interim period between an election and such an election being held for the party leadership, the deputy leader or the highest ranked House of Representatives member shall act as leader for the interim.
I welcome the fact that the parliamentary Labor Party has chosen to support these procedural amendments moved by myself and the Deputy Prime Minister.
Friends, for the future, this is an important set of reforms for our party.
Across Australia, the great thing about the Australian Labor movement is that we are a party of the grass roots.
We are at our best when we are listening to people right across the country.
And we are at our best when we know that the rank and file of our membership, all 44,000 of them, know that they have an active say in the future direction of our party.
This therefore is a good story to sell for us across the country.
I believe it is the right message for the party, it is the right message also to the country at large, who have raised concerns about these matters in recent times.
I repeat, under this reform, we have implemented the single greatest reform in the parliamentary Labor Party, the Labor Party more generally in recent times.
Not only democratising the party but also ensuring that the Prime Minister the Australian people vote for is the Prime Minister that the Australian people then get.
Of course, this is a matter for us primarily but also of relevance to the country at large.
As well as this, in recent times, we have embraced another series of important policy directions.
Last Friday, we made clear through the announcement with Prime Minister Peter O'Neill from Papua New Guinea, our new approach to the question of asylum seekers.
The rules have changed and that is now legitimately the subject of attention around the world, which is precisely as we want it to be.
A clear cut message to people smugglers around the world.
This month, we have also launched our landmark national disability reforms, DisabilityCare Australia.
On track to benefit tens of thousands, then hundreds of thousands and then millions of Australians over time, though ultimately peaking at this stage, based on our projections, at 460,000.
We have also extended our Better Schools negotiations under the Better Schools Plan.
We have received, of course, the support of the Government of Tasmania, the Independent Schools Association and we are also into the conclusion of our negotiations with other sectors of the Australian education community as well.
We have also acted to scrap the carbon tax, bringing forward the introduction of the emissions trading scheme, which will ease cost of living pressures for Australian families.
Friends, what I would say overall to all Australians who have been engaged with what we have been doing in the last three weeks, is we have been getting our own house in order.
With this major reform to the parliamentary party, I believe we have one of the most modern party structures in Australia, going into the future. That is as it should be.
We have also been putting our best foot forward on key areas of policy, on the future challenges to our economy and our response to it through a national competitiveness agenda, through to what we have done most recently also in relation to asylum seekers and of course the price on carbon.
More work is to be done.
We will continue to do our best for the Australian people but I believe this is a positive day for democracy in Australia, an historic day for the Australian Labor Party and a great day for Australian Labor Party members across our nation.
JOURNALIST: With the Caucus rule on the leadership, are you worried at all that the trade unions may try and change that post-election at national conference or are you confident that fifty-fifty model will now stick?
PM: The Caucus is the master of its own destiny.
The Caucus has spoken and after a significant protracted, vigorous debate involving no uniformity of views, but reaching a resolution that this was the best way forward, the Caucus has spoken.
Therefore, this will be the model we take into the future.
I know there will be some resistance from a few folk around the show.
That is normal given the composition of our great and glorious movement.
But let me tell you, this has been a vigorous debate today.
It has been a lot of consultation over the last two weeks and frankly this is reform that has been coming for a long, long time.
The Australian Labor Party needs to throw open the doors and the windows to let a bit of fresh air in for the future. In fact, a lot of fresh air.
Open to new ideas, new people to make sure we're out there representing the Australia of tomorrow, not the Australia of 40 years ago.
JOURNALIST: In recent weeks there has been allegations of branch stacking, for example in the seat of Kingsford Smith. With these reforms, how long are they going to take to filter through if there is allegations of branch stacking in recent days?
PM: Party reform is a long process.
This single reform in terms of the election of the parliamentary leader is, I think, the biggest reform in recent party history, by a long shot.
In terms of probity across NSW, you will understand that not long ago, I requested the national executive to undertake intervention in the state of NSW.
That process is underway.
Any irregularities in any voting process, of course, would go through the national executive.
Party reform overall is going to take a while yet. There are future things to do as well.
I want to see the party democratised more and more and more.
That is the pathway to the future and no one in our show should have anything to fear from the voice of the people.
JOURNALIST: Were asylum seeker issues discussed, Mr Rudd, and what was the response from your colleagues on that – on your plan?
PM: Obviously I provided a report to the Caucus on what I have been doing as leader with my Cabinet colleagues over recent weeks.
And, of course, I reported to them on the reasons we had taken the decision we announced last Friday with the Prime Minister of Papua New Guinea.
Obviously, there are Caucus members who are concerned about this and they expressed their concerns directly.
My response and that of Tony Burke – the Minister – and other colleagues, was that our challenge here is to deal a fatal blow to the people smuggling industry long term.
And you can't do that unless you go to the core reason this industry exists, which is them offering people around Australia – around the world I should say – the prospect of coming here to live full-time.
Rather than us taking - rather than us continuing to take refugees from other centres around the world which is what we’ve done in recent times.
So this – from our perspective and the Government's perspective and my response to questions from the Caucus – is the right response and it is the right ethical response to the drownings we see at sea, the proliferation of this industry, and the fact that people languishing in camps for 10 and 20 years aren't getting a fair go, in terms of coming here as a bona fide refugee.
JOURNALIST: You once argued there was a biblical requirement for us to look after the stranger in our midst, has that argument gone, what has happened to that argument?
PM: Well, without going to the absolute accuracy of your quote, let me say this: we have an ethical responsibility to look after people wherever we can.
And that means that when people come to our shores, we look after them humanely and we look after them humanely consistent with what we're required to do, as well, through international law and under the refugee's convention.
And through this approach, the regional resettlement arrangement, we are doing precisely that.
We have been mindful of first of all, the importance of people being treated in a humane fashion.
We have been mindful of the requirement that people are assessed according to proper standards.
We are mindful, also, that under the current provisions of the convention, no-one is actually ultimately required to provide a final state of residence for a person determined to be a refugee.
There is a requirement for best efforts under the current convention but no requirement to actually say here is where you can live once your status is determined. We have done that.
And on top of that, it is the requirement, we feel, both under international law, and in our response to this practical challenge, to use the humanitarian quota of 20,000 places to benefit those who are languishing, in some cases rotting in camps, around the world.
These are our ethical requirements as well and I will not be Prime Minister of Australia and see the entire orderly immigration system itself threatened by not sending a message such as this to the people smuggling industry around the world.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, how quickly can you scale up Manus Island to the 3,000 that you mentioned, and also if your efforts are frustrated in legislation after the election, would you be prepared to call a double dissolution on it?
PM: I won't go into hypotheticals at all.
What we have done is put forward a clear cut policy.
We have negotiated and agreed it with the Government of Papua New Guinea.
We have had Cabinet National Security Committee and its advisors and the full Cabinet working on this for some weeks.
We believe we have a thorough approach which is eminently defensible in the international community and with the prospect of being effective.
Now, on the question of the implementation of this, which goes to your first part of your question, as I said, and Minister Burke said, in our press conferences last Friday: this is going to take quite a while to roll out.
It is a big operational undertaking and I have said from the outset, there will be bumps in the road, there’ll be challenges on the way, we understand that.
People will engage in the politics of this big time, as well as the prospect of legal challenges here and Papua New Guinea.
This is what happens when you seek to act decisively on something as fundamental as this.
But we make no apology for the decision we have taken.
We have reflected on it long and hard, and we believe it is the right response given the incoming problem that we now face.
JOURNALIST: The British Labour Party is having a discussion at the moment about restricting union members who are members of the Labour Party only to those who have a ticket in the British Labour Party, so you don't have the automatic union affiliation. Is this something you think the Australian Labor Party should look at?
PM: Well I was talking to Ed Miliband, the British Labour Party leader, about this in the last couple of weeks. Ed’s a good friend of mine – I’ve known him for the last decade or so.
So I won't comment on the British internal debate, a matter for the Poms, and they seem to be doing well in a few areas of late recently as well unfortunately.
But, could I say this: what we are seeking to do here with this reform is say to all of our friends and supporters in the trade union movement, we want you active in the branches of the Australian Labor Party. That is what we're saying.
So when you’ve got a have a whole lot of people out there who are members of trade unions, we want you to be active in your local branch – the Balmain branch, the Bulimba branch in Brisbane where I come from.
So that you're part and parcel of local community life.
That is where we want to see the activism of our trade union friends and that is what this reform is designed to encourage.
JOURNALIST: Does the no advantage principle apply to asylum seekers sent to Papua New Guinea: meaning that do they still languish for years unspecified to have their claims processed or will claims be processed immediately?
PM: On that, I direct that question to the Immigration Minister. I don't wish to say anything inaccurate.
As you know, we indicated that this new arrangement would apply from the date of announcement last Friday. But I would suggest you put that question to him. I do not want to say anything which is misleading.
JOURNALIST: You say you won't apologise for the toughness of this policy, but will you apologise for dismantling the Pacific solutions?
PM: In many times in the recent debate on the question of asylum seekers policy, what I’ve said I this – and I think you’re aware of it.
Number one: we took our policies to the 2007 election with that explicitly made clear to the Australian people and we were voted in on that basis. And we did so under the circumstances at the time.
What I have said most recently in interviews on this subject is that circumstances then internationally changed, particularly in the period of 2009-10.
I have also said we should have adjusted our policy earlier.
What I am saying now is given the information about the numbers of people coming; secondly it overwhelming our humanitarian quota of 20,000 a year, who normally we ask people around the world through the UNHCR to fill.
This required an adjustment in policy.
That is what I have said and that is what underpins the new policy approach we have adopted for the future.
Remember, Australia remains the third most-generous country in the world in the resettlement of refugees.
After the United States and Canada, we take the largest number. Under this Government we have increased it from 12,000 to 20,000 a year.
I have foreshadowed with the successful implementation of this regional resettlement arrangement, that we also leave open the possibility of increasing that number from 20,000 to 27,000.
I have also said very clearly here are the range of other protections we are building in under the obligations of the UN Convention. But I am also saying to people smugglers and their business model around the world that, frankly, your model is busted.
And you better get used to that fact because this Government is going to take a hard line on this.
These folk are merchants in death and their business model needs to be dismantled. Part of this policy response is to do just that.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, have you made a final decision on the election date yet and if you have, do you care to share it with us?
PM: Let me just say, you know something, in this period of government, we have been focused on the outstanding policy challenges that we face.
And there are still a number to address.
We have been dealing with this problem of asylum seekers policy.
We have been dealing with the challenges of cost of living pressures and therefore the decision we have taken to scrap the carbon tax.
We have also been dealing with the matters that gathered here today to attend to in Balmain which is fundamental party reform.
I have also been seized as, to the Government, of the new economic challenges which lie ahead of us given the end of the China resources boom and the need for us to diversify the economy, create new industries, so we don't have all of our eggs in one basket.
These are big challenges for government. We still have other challenges to deal with.
People have mentioned here today, this broader debate as I understand that you would on asylum seekers.
I have also seen statements from Mr Abbott on this. I want to make something plain here in my response to what he has said today.
It is quite plain to us that Mr Abbott is out there deliberately undermining the Government's clear message to people smugglers.
This is not in the national interest. It might be in Mr Abbott's personal political interest but frankly, if you do that sort of stuff, you raise the question about your ultimate fitness to hold the high office of Prime Minister.


PM: Women and men of Balmain, this is Unity Hall. You tell me this is where the Labor Party began. I say it began in Unity Hall and Barcaldine.
But let us not revisit the State of Origin, even for the Australian Labor Party.
The thing is we are here where the movement began, and today we have sought to give the movement its future.
What I see here are so many people who have been hardworking members of our party for years, for decades, and in some cases with our life members, more than half a century.
You are our heart and soul. You are the sinew in our bodies which makes it possible for us to function as a political party and movement.
Your values, your passion; without that we are nothing. We are absolutely nothing. With it we are everything and with those values, with that passion we can prevail.
When I look at you as hardworking members of our party, I have this simple view in my very basic Queensland heart which says this: you as members of the Australian Labor Party, our rank and file, you should have a say in the future election of the leader of the Australian Labor Party.
Our party should have nothing to fear to throw its doors open, throw its windows open, to our great rank and file, into our local communities, because we represent you therefore we should trust you to elect the best people possible to lead our movement in the future.
So I am perfectly relaxed in surrendering our future to you.
The new rule is pretty basic really. You get 50 per cent of the say, the federal parliamentary Labor Party gets 50 per cent of the say; I reckon that equals 100 per cent excellence for the future.
And before we get to the inevitable carping from the person who seeks to be Prime Minister of Australia, I would just say to him one thing. Mr Abbott, why don’t you try it yourself in your own party?
A little democracy in the Liberal Party mightn’t go astray.
I know they are normally a perfectly united mob, and I know Malcolm has his own views on that in recent days, but can I just say throwing the doors open of our major political parties is about rejuvenating the lifeblood of democracy itself.
And we are leading the way, as we have always done in the past.
Friends, the challenge which lies ahead of us is big. I make no pretence that this election, whenever it is held, is going to be easy. It will not. Hard work lies ahead of us.
They think, and they’ve thought, that they’ve had this thing in the bag. Remember Tony Abbott said he’s been busy writing his victory speech?
I think the Australian people always look askance at political arrogance when they see it.
Then we had the federal director – what’s his name – Loughnane, addressing a gathering of the Liberal party faithful in Canberra only two months ago saying we the Liberal Party have won this election.
Again I say the Australian people are very harsh judges of political arrogance when they see it.
Instead what I know is securing each and every voter’s support, for us obtaining victory at the next election will be fought suburb by suburb, town by town, city by city, state by state, branch by branch, polling booth by polling booth, and I am confident we can win.
Friends I conclude with this: the mission of Labor is to build up the house. We build things. We build the schools. We go out there and we build the universities. We build hospitals. We build things called the National Broadband Network.
We build things that matter, which create a house in which our people and the people of our nation can live and have their being and have a sense of prosperity and security for the future.
We are the nation builders. We build the house. The other mob, they have a much easier script. They tear the house down. That’s the difference.
‘National Broadband Network? No, no, not for you Sonny Jim, we’ll remove that. A Better Schools Plan for your school? No you can’t have that money over there, we’ll rip that money away from kids and from teachers.’
‘Oh, new libraries in your schools, new multipurpose facilities, new classrooms, new electronic whiteboards, no we’ll take all those away as well.’
And by the way, the National Broadband Network we’ll just rip out of the ground or disconnect it.
We build the house up, they tear it down. We’re the nation builders, the other mob would frankly just sit back and wait for the magic of the marketplace for just make it all better in the never-never.
That’s not who we are; we are Labor.
We believe in building the nation; we believe in fairness for all; we believe in a fair go for all.
We believe in building the nation through each community, each suburb, each city, right around this vast country of ours and making sure that all of us, whether we are newly arrived on these shores, have been here for generations or have been here since eternity with the First Australians, that we are one Australian family together.
That is our vision and our purpose. We build the house up, they tear it down. We unite the nation, they seek to divide it.
We have a positive plan for the future. All they’ve got is a box and barrel of negativity like you’ve never seen before.
That’s the difference folks, that’s who we are, that’s who they are.
That’s why we will fight to ensure the future remains with this Australian Labor Government.
I thank you.


CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY
[ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS OMITTED]
In my first National Security Statement to the Parliament five years ago, I said that the first priority of government was the nation’s security.
Much has changed since then in the national security landscape.
What has not changed is the resolve of our government in responding to the national security challenges we face.
The work of national security is hard work.
It is demanding work.
It is necessary work.
And for the professionals who do the work, it is rewarding work.
We must ensure our intelligence community has what it needs to protect us from the threats of today.
And to anticipate the threats of tomorrow.
We must always be vigilant on national security.
And the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation has for two thirds of a century been a cornerstone of our national security.
I was struck by a remark your Director-General made in a speech not so long ago: ASIO’s successes are mostly unheralded or, if they have been made public, soon forgotten. We remember the bomb that went off, not that one that was defused.
This was a simple acknowledgement of the great paradox that all intelligence agencies face.
 You deal in counterfactuals.
You succeed by making sure that things don’t happen.
The better you are at your work, the less we hear of you. The less we know about you.
The men and women who work in our national security family don’t take on this task for fame or fortune.
Nor for personal glory.
They do it to make this country safe.
National security is hard work.
There are certain qualities that this work requires.
Qualities of Courage. Sacrifice. Dedication. Professionalism.
In that respect, as a nation, we have been well served by our national security community.
The defence of our national security has always been tied fundamentally to our sense of nationhood, and throughout our nation’s history.
It was thus under Deakin and Fisher.
Under Curtin, Chifley and Menzies.
And down to the present day.
In 1949, it was the Chifley Government that wrote the charter for ASIO.
The Cold War was upon us.
And ASIO’s creation reflected the fact that Australia was taking responsibility for this important part of your national security.
In the directive he provided to the first Director-General of Security, Mr Justice Reed, Prime Minister Chifley said that ASIO would be tasked with defending Australia from: external and internal dangers arising from attempts at espionage and sabotage, and from the actions of persons and organisations.
I should add, David, that Chifley also went on to say that: Members of the organisation should not be unduly prominent at cocktail parties, but should devote themselves to the tasks allotted to them.
For all the years that now separate us from Ben Chifley’s Australia and ours, his vision for the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation has survived the passage of time.
The end of the Cold War did not end the threat of espionage and terrorism.
We depend on ASIO to protect our democratic freedoms.
To deal with terrorism.
And to combat espionage. 
This is the hard work of national security.
On a day such as today, we should pause for a moment to reflect on the work others are doing in this the hard work of national security in Australia’s name.
• Think of the diggers at Tarin Kot, backed by intelligence agencies that work to define the threats they encounter.
• Think of the pilots of the Hercules touching down in Kabul as they provide support to the International Security Assistance Force.
• Think of our police and military serving as members in the Solomon Islands mission as their mission draws to a close.
• Think of the more than 3000 Australian Defence personnel deployed on operations around the world as we meet here in Canberra today.
• Think for a moment of our Australian Defence personnel currently serving in UN and multilateral peace and security operations in such countries as Afghanistan, Egypt, Iraq, Israel, Lebanon, South Sudan and Syria.
• Think of our cyber specialists.
• Of our intelligence analysts.
• Think of the Australian Federal Police and our customs and border protection personnel.
• Think also of our diplomats and our aid workers often working in dangerous environments around the world.
 In a world of change, new threats are constantly emerging or evolving – cyber threats, terrorism at home and abroad and people smuggling.
The technology-dependent world we now live in also presents more challenges and threats.
 Australia now operates in a world of complex systems, all vulnerable to malicious cyber activity, whether originating from states, criminal organisations or misguided individuals.
 For this reason, the Australian Government’s determination is to continue to lift our cyber capabilities including our network defences.
 In opening today’s building, we are also opening the new Australian Cyber Security Centre – dedicated to analysing cyber threats, coordinating the government response and developing preventative strategies.
 This Centre, located in this new building, will bring together the existing cyber capabilities from across Defence, the Attorney-General’s Department, ASIO, the Australian Federal Police and the Australian Crime Commission.
 These capabilities will include ASIO’s cyber espionage specialists, experts from the Australian Signals Directorate’s Cyber Security Operations Centre and the Computer Emergency Response Team Australia.
 This is delivering on the government’s commitment outlined in my first National Security Statement to bind “the detailed and diverse work of the national security community into a coherent, coordinated whole”.
National security requires looking beyond the horizon.
 National security requires the best people and equipment.
 It also requires financial resources.
 Tough decisions have to be made in accordance with priorities.
 Since 2008, government investment in national security has increased from $28.6 billion in our first budget in 2008-09 to $32.3 billion in 2013 14.
 The government’s most recent budget provided more than $100 billion to Defence over the Budget and Forward Estimates and around $220 billion as guidance for the following six years.
 The Government is also focused on increasing our cyber security capabilities, with our investment growing from $233 million in 2011-12 to $368 million in 2013-14.
 These reflect important commitments for our future national security needs.
 The government will also continue to invest the resources necessary for the purposes of our border security and take the hard decisions that are necessary in the national interest, whether they are popular or not.
 This is what the nation expects of its national political leaders on the things that matter for our national security.
 Today, nearly two-thirds of a century after its creation, the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation continues to adapt and evolve to counter emerging threats and protect Australians from those who wish us harm.
 It helps provide the Australian Government the intelligence it needs to weigh up the complex questions of national security.
 And the dedicated men and women of ASIO carry out their work with a self-effacing, no-nonsense excellence that its founder Ben Chifley would recognise and endorse.
 It is only fitting that your new headquarters should take this the name of the Prime Minister who brought this institution into being.
 It is now my great pleasure to declare the Ben Chifley Building officially open.
 [ENDS]


Subject(s): Flagstaff Hill Primary School; Better Schools Plan; Local investment in health; Meeting with Premier Weatherill; Holden; Asylum seekers
PM: It is great to be here with Senator Don Farrell, Senator for South Australia and the Federal Minister for Sport and for those reasons Don is passionately committed to what we do with in school programs to boost our sporting capabilities, our physical fitness and all the sort of games you’ve been playing here today. And of course Annabel Digance who is our candidate for this Federal Seat of Boothby.
It’s great to be here with all the good folks at Flagstaff Hill Primary School. It’s a good school to be at this afternoon.
You have introduced me to how to play sharks and dead ants, is that right?
These are two traditional South Australian games which I’ve never heard of in my life but thank you for the cultural introduction.
One of the reasons we’re here is just to look at the sort of investments we’ve been able to make in wonderful Australian schools like the one here at Flagstaff Hill.
I have just been talking to the principal or told we’ve invested around $4 million in this school.
You can see what it does for the school community.
Number one: I was just told by the principal that in the 30-35 years that the school has been in existence they’ve never ever been able to have a whole of school assembly.
That means putting all the kids together, 400 or so, with mums and dads and grandparents in a single place and it’s really good for community life and school community life.
The other thing which is the big advantage and I see you’ve done it well here with your basketball courts and the rest is that when the weather is crook you can come inside and play and I know it’s always fine and sunny here in South Australia.
I’m told you had a bit of rain recently, it looks very green flying in, but that’s the other reason.
But the third is for out of school hours care.
The, what you call down here I think oshc, is that right?
In Queensland we call it OSHC but yours is easier, oshc.
The thing about this program is it’s literally hundreds of thousands of folks around Australia use out of school hours care programs.
It’s really good, provides flexibility for mums and dads and carers and grandparents before school and after school.
I think I was told here before that it’s available from about 7:30 in the morning, 7:15 until when school starts at 8:45 and then the afternoon from 3:15 until 6:15.
That gives mums and dads lots of flexibility but on top of that you’ve got all these great folks who are here for the active sports program which is funded by the Australian government in whole.
But we cooperate with states to make sure it works well within their various systems.
The whole idea is to make sure you have fun and enjoy physical fitness when you are here after school.
We’re very proud of the achievements that we’ve been able to deliver for the education system more broadly.
I was talking before to the principal about our Better Schools Plan and we’ve now agreed on this plan with the South Australian State Government, we’ve agreed on it with the Catholic education system and the independent schools.
What that means is that altogether we are now going to be investing some additional $660 million in extra funding over the next six years.
$430 million from the Australian Government, $230 million from the South Australian Government.
This makes a huge difference to the quality of our schools.
What’s it about? Better schools, better teaching and better education for you guys so that you have all the skills that you need for the future, for the jobs of the future, once you finish high school and go off and go and do different things afterwards, that’s what it’s about.
Now what does it mean for your school here at Flagstaff Hill?
Well according to our numbers it’s about $1.5 million extra for this school over the next six years which is an increase of about 28 per cent per student.
So this is genuinely a Better Schools Plan for Australia.
Now right across the nation it’s about $15 billion extra investment in schools because we believe in education being the foundation stone for Australia’s future.
You kids are going to be a huge part of it.
Here in this particular community here in Boothby we’ve also been investing more broadly.
About $108 million altogether in 30 new classrooms across this community.
21 new school libraries, 20 new multipurpose facilities like this.
Two new science and language centres in the secondary schools and on top of that more than 7,000 computers have been installed in the secondary schools.
I’ve just visited a school in Devonport in Tasmania, Devonport State High at around lunchtime today and those kids – all 600 of them at that high school – for the first time they’ve all got laptops in their school.
This is really designed to make sure that every Australian kid gets a fair chance to participate in what we call the digital education revolution.
On top of that, in this area, we’ve also been investing in five new Trade Training Centres and what they are is when you get to high school and you decide you want to become a carpenter, become a bricklayer, become a mechanic or work on design and fashion and those sorts of things, Trade Training Centres are designed to help those kids; and we built five brand new ones benefiting six local high schools which is a good thing as well.
One or two other things I’d like to talk about in terms of our achievements here.
At the university we’ve also invested $6.5 million in capital funding Flinders University to build a lecture theatre complex.
On top of that we have a share of a $28 million investment in the Flinders Medical Centre for the establishment of new emergency department models of care and $40 million investment in a Repatriation General Hospital for the establishment of 20 new sub-acute beds.
So across education, across health and across a number of other areas, we have been very active in this community.
So the reason I’ve gone through those things is to say we believe in making a difference and so that you can look at befores and afters and before, none of the things that I’ve just talked about were here five or six years ago, they are now.
It’s all about making it better for you guys.
Whether it’s here at primary schools, where it’s here at out of school hours care with the Active Sports Program, whether it’s Trade Training Centres, universities or other key services as well.
So together with Annabel and Don we’re here to make a difference for this local community and for the good people of South Australia.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, will you be meeting with the Premier and…
PM: Sure, I’ll talk to Jay a bit later today.
I think the staff are all sorting out times so we’ll have a chat and as far as the future of Holden is concerned, for me this is a question of the national interest.
It is why the Australian government has already, I think in December last year made a co-investment agreement with GMH in excess of $200 million and we are in continued discussions through Industry Minister Kim Carr on how we ensure that Australia has a viable long term motor industry including GMH, including here in South Australia.
Because it’s part of Australia’s history and its future.
JOURNALIST: Will you be accepting any of his recommendations in terms of altering the FBT?
PM: I think the key thing for the future of GMH is to have a long term investment.
Remember, we’re the Government that put together the $5.4 million new car plan which was to support and be partners with GMH and also with Toyota.
On top of that, we have these other agreements that we’ve signed as well.
What we’ve got to look to is not the next year or two. You’ve actually got to look out to the next 5, 10, 15 years.
As I’ve said before, I don’t want to be Prime Minister of a country that doesn’t make things anymore. And that means making sure we’ve got a viable, long term auto industry.
So we’ll chat all those things through with Jay later in the day, but I’m determined to see this auto industry survive into the future.
JOURNALIST: Prime Minister, you’ve said with the PNG solution that you expect there to be bumps in the road. How long do you expect those bumps to last?
PM: I actually talked about that a lot this morning when I was in Tasmania.
I repeat the fact that if you’re bringing in a major new policy which is important in dealing with the long term challenge of people smugglers, which is to say to them: if you expect to bring people to Australia by boat, people smugglers, then they will not be settled in Australia – implementing that policy is hard, tough business.
We intend to get on with the business and we are resolute in our course of action.
JOURNALIST: Do you have an aspirational time frame of when you’d like to see those bumps ironed out?
PM: What I said when we launched the policy – and I’m sure you read it last Friday – was that this is a policy for the months and years ahead.
It’s key that we establish a clear cut policy direction for the future, and to implement it.
There’s a difference between that on the one hand and three-word slogans on the other.
I get really worried, really worried, when I see certain people out there talking about Papua New Guinea, and talking about the Chief of the Defence Force in the way in which they’ve done in the last 24 to 48 hours.
We’ve seen some responses to that as well.
The point I make is this: if you’re going to deal with big challenges, like people smugglers, it means having a well thought through policy which will be implemented, recognising that there are going to be challenges on the way.
As opposed to simply pulling stuff out of the air and cobbling it together with a few three-word slogans.
On top of that, our policy’s been framed in partnership with our regional friends and partners in Asia and the Pacific.
We work very closely with them.
I draw your attention to statements which have been made by various regional governments about various alternate proposals in recent days – not to mention the statements today about the Opposition’s most recent three-word slogan.
JOURNALIST: On the Opposition’s plan for border protection, how is that different to what’s in place now and do you think theirs is a simpler version with their chain of command?
PM: Well I’m pretty interested in the reaction of various Defence professionals today and I think we should be very attentive about what they’ve had to say about this proposal.
What I’m concerned about is the big questions for Australia’s future, including border security, including making sure these kids have the best schools in the world, and to make sure we keep the economy – including its manufacturing sector – strong so that there are jobs for the future.


The Australian Government today announced that Australia will host a Youth 20 (Y20) summit next year as part of its G20 presidency. The Y20 will give young people a voice in the G20 discussions.
The Y20 will gather young leaders from the world’s twenty largest economies for an exciting exchange of ideas. It will help build skills and networks, and identify the most pressing economic challenges and opportunities facing young people today.
 The involvement of youth in the official G20 program will help strengthen G20 discussions and outcomes by harnessing the energy and innovative thinking of young people.
 The Government has established a Y20 Planning Group of seven young Australians to plan and manage the Australian Y20 in 2014. They will reach out to youth across Australia and the globe, and develop a Y20 process that will ensure meaningful engagement between young people and the G20 in 2014.
 Members of the Planning Group were selected based on their expertise and impressive leadership skills in one or more of the following areas: youth policy, energy, development, international relations, entrepreneurship, climate change and economics.
 Mr Benson Saulo, Director of the National Indigenous Youth Leadership Academy, will chair the Group, whose members are:  
• Ms Samah Hadid (NSW)
• Ms Yassmin Abdel-Magid (QLD)
• Mr Scott Limbrick (VIC)
• Mr Ehon Chan (QLD)
• Ms Amanda McKenzie (ACT)
• Ms Holly Ransom (WA).
 An impressive program of events is available for Australia’s young people in the lead up to the Y20, including the announcements of National Youth Award recipients in August and the Young Australian of the Year Award in January, and National Youth Week running from 4 to 13 April 2014.  
 The Group of Twenty (G20) is the premier forum for its members economic and financial cooperation. It brings together the world's major advanced and emerging economies, representing around 85 per cent of global GDP. Russia is hosting the G20 in 2013, and Australia will host in 2014, with the leaders summit to be held in Brisbane in November 2014.
 G20 youth events have been held since the 2010 Toronto summit. Mexico formalised the Youth 20 (Y20) as part of the official G20 program in 2012, recognising the effect G20 decisions have on young people across the globe. Russia held an Y20 Summit in June this year, and Australia will continue the Y20 in 2014.
 The Y20 is the main platform for young people across the G20 to make their voices heard on the most pressing global economic challenges. Y20 summits involve substantive policy discussions between youth from across the globe and also include social events, cultural exchange and the opportunity for delegates to make lasting connections in G20 countries.
 The Russian Y20 summit was held 18-21 June in St Petersburg, in the margins of the St Petersburg International Economic Forum. The delegates produced a policy communique for the consideration of leaders, which covered areas such as education, climate change, energy and financial regulation.
 The Australian Y20 will be organised by the Planning Group with support from the Office for Youth in the Department of Education, Employment and Workplace Relations.


